Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
773
Chapter 24
MILITARY MEDICINE IN HUMANITARIAN
MISSIONS
JOAN T. ZAJTCHUK, MD, SPEC IN HSA*
INTRODUCTION
THE LEGAL AND MORAL BASIS FOR HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
THE BEGINNINGS OF US HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE (1900–1945)
US HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE IN NATION BUILDING/
COUNTERINSURGENCY PROGRAMS (1945–1975)
Nation Building After World War II
The Emergence of Counterinsurgency Policies
The Beginnings of Military Civic Action Doctrine
Southeast Asia and Vietnam: Implementation of Civic Action Programs
THE CHANGING CONCEPT OF NATION BUILDING (1975–2000)
The Aftermath of the Vietnam War
Nation Building in Central America: The Background
The Beginning of the DoD Humanitarian Mission in Central America
Formalizing the Role of the Department of Defense
Honduras: Military Medicine in Civic Action Programs—The SOUTHCOM
Model
El Salvador: Military Medicine in Security Assistance Training Programs
Project Coordination and Accountability
THE IMPACT OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE IN CENTRAL AMERICA
The Benefits of Humanitarian Assistance for Host Countries
Some Problems Associated With Humanitarian Assistance
THE PRESENT AND FUTURE OF NATION BUILDING (2001)
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, United States Army; formerly, Consultant to the Army Surgeon General and the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Health Affairs; Hospital Commander, Joint Task Force Bravo, Medical Element, Honduras and Command Surgeon, Honduras;
currently, Professor of Otolaryngology and Bronchoesophagology, Center for Advanced Technology and International Health, RushPresbyterian-St. Luke’s Medical Center, 600 South Paulina, Suite 524, Chicago, Illinois 60612-3832
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
774
H. Charles McBarron
Operation New Life
Guam, 1975
Operation New Life occurred during the spring and summer of 1975. With the collapse of South Vietnam, more than
130,000 Southeast Asian refugees were evacuated to the United States. Over 90,000 received some type of medical
care…. In the foreground, as concerned relatives look on, an Army nurse checks an injured Vietnamese. The scene is
typical of many long evenings in tents set up as emergency medical stations on Guam, the first stop for the refugees.
Caption and art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC. Available
at: http://history.amedd.army.mil/art/vietnam_files/guam.jpg.
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
775
INTRODUCTION
ing exercises (MEDRETEs); deployment for training exercises (DTEs) for active duty, reserve, and
national guard units; and programs for Special
Forces medics.
Despite the plethora of assistance programs, the
primary focus of military medicine remains that of
supporting military deployments and combat operations. When the military does get involved in
humanitarian assistance, a critical determinant of
its military role is the mission statement, which
elaborates the guidelines and constraints for the
military’s actions in a given operation. The mission
originates from the executive branch of government
and includes political objectives. Whereas most relief organizations strive to be neutral, military forces
are directed by government policy. Therefore, the
military is easily perceived as having interests other
than solely humanitarian relief, particularly in situations that involve armed conflict. This may result
in an adversarial relationship that interferes with
the ability of both the military and various relief
organizations to provide, coordinate, and complement medical assistance programs.
Some critics have cautioned that for the military
to embrace humanitarian assistance as a major mission is unrealistic and inappropriate. 6,9 There are
EXHIBIT 24-1
SUBJECT MATTER EXPERT EXCHANGE
PROGRAM
In 1988, the first Subject Matter Expert Exchange
Program, using Army Medical Department personnel, was begun in the Southern Command
(SOUTHCOM) and included the host countries of
Chile, Guatemala, and Colombia. Although the
scope of the program was, and continues to be,
small, it demonstrates the growth of related programs benefiting the host nation. The exchanges,
on topics such as disaster relief, preventive medicine, field hygiene, trauma evacuation, and healthcare administration, were of mutual benefit to both
the United States and the host countries and also
enriched US understanding of host-country military healthcare systems. These diverse programs
demonstrate the opportunities provided at the
individual training level, at the host-country medical level, and also within the host-country military force level.
The US military has a long tradition of providing emergency humanitarian relief after armed confrontation, natural disasters, and during deployments for training around the world. The use of the
military for humanitarian assistance has frequently
been controversial,1 and the effectiveness of some
of the previous missions has been justifiably questioned. 2–4 However, many policymakers believe that
to further national interests the US military should
be involved in humanitarian assistance in the post–
Cold-War period. 5,6 Assisting populations affected
by disaster of natural or human origin is important
for the maintenance of peace, security, and stability in today’s world. According to US national security policy, emergency humanitarian assistance
will be an essential capability of US forces in the
21st century. 7,8
Prior to the establishment in 1984 of the Office
for Humanitarian Assistance/Civic Action in the
Department of Defense (DoD), many programs, including medical efforts, had already been widely
funded for a number of years. It has only been since
the 1990s, however, that the term “humanitarian
assistance” applied to medical civic action missions
in the medical departments of the military service
branches. At this time, the US Congress authorized
and funded DoD humanitarian assistance/civic
action programs that allow all military branches to
provide humanitarian assistance in conjunction
with authorized military exercises throughout the
world and target primary healthcare needs. The
program also provides funding to distribute excess
medical equipment and supplies to other nations if
requested. These various programs include longstanding foreign military assistance programs such
as the Security Assistance Program that funds teams
of US military personnel to provide training to a
host nation (this was done in El Salvador by the
Army Medical Department with the medical mobile training teams [MTTs]). This assistance must
be requested by the host nation and is part of the
foreign military sales (FMS) program. The host nation is requesting training in lieu of military hardware procurement. The Latin American Cooperative (LATAM COOP) Fund supports the military
medical Subject Matter Expert Exchange (SMEE)
program for military medical personnel exchanges
and training in the United States and in the host
nation (Exhibit 24-1). Both of these assistance programs were only recently utilized by the Army
Medical Department in Latin America. The military
medical programs include medical readiness trainMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
776
several reasons for the continuing controversy regarding the appropriateness of associated humanitarian missions for the DoD during deployments.
First, there has been the lack of a benefit outcomes
analysis of previous DoD programs. Second, there
is the perception by other US governmental agencies (such as the Department of State, the United
States Agency for International Development, and
the Peace Corps) of potential conflicting interagency
roles. These same agencies directed similar criticism
toward military civic action programs during the
Vietnam War. (Because of this criticism, in the immediate post-Vietnam era, civic action programs of
any nature were rarely discussed at the policy level
and generally were conducted only by Special Operations forces.) And finally, there has been the lack
of a uniform, coordinated policy and execution for
these medical programs within the DoD. However,
the extensive military medical civic action programs
in the Southern Command (SOUTHCOM), especially
in Honduras, have been instrumental in providing an
impetus for the development of potential models and
policy directives over the last several years.
US forces are almost certain to be called on again
to assist in international humanitarian relief efforts.
Historical precedent, the extensive number of conflicts in the post–Cold-War world, and military
policy all strongly suggest this. There is as yet little
strategic planning that determines when and how
the military should be used in their humanitarian
assistance roles. It is my professional opinion, based
on my military experience providing humanitarian
assistance, that medical readiness training exercises
(MEDRETEs) have proved successful in providing
humanitarian and civic assistance in Latin America
countries and can serve as a model as the United
States military deploys to medically underserved
areas around the world.
THE LEGAL AND MORAL BASIS FOR HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
There are criteria that recognize and build on the
body of international humanitarian10 and human
rights law that governs the conduct of nations toward civilian populations in international and internal armed conflicts. These criteria recognize that
certain principles11 must govern all humanitarian
assistance, including:
• Humanity: Human suffering should be addressed wherever it is found. The dignity
and rights of all victims must be respected
and protected;
• Impartiality: Humanitarian assistance
should be provided without discriminating
as to ethnic origin, gender, nationality, political opinions, race, or religion. Relief of
the suffering of individuals must be guided
solely by their needs and priority must be
given to the most urgent cases of distress;
• Neutrality: Humanitarian assistance should
be provided without engaging in hostilities
or taking sides in controversies of a political, religious, or ideological nature;
• Independence: The independence of action
by humanitarian agencies should not be
infringed upon or unduly influenced by
political, military, or other interests; and
• Empowerment: Humanitarian assistance
should strive to revitalize local institutions,
enabling them to provide for the needs of
the affected community. Humanitarian assistance should provide a solid first step on
the continuum of emergency relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction, and development.
Peacekeeping operations by US military forces
may cause problems for humanitarian organizations. Rather than providing protection for workers within these organizations, by their concurrent
presence within the host country, these operations
may actually place their civilian personnel at greater
risk. To label the military’s efforts as peacekeeping
or “operations other than war” also creates false
assurances about the safety of these missions. Such
a label is misleading because it suggests risk- and
casualty-free operations. By acknowledging that
military operations are the primary end (securing
and insuring peace), the role of the associated humanitarian activity becomes the pursuit of national
policy by other means. If policy makers cling too
tightly to the “humanitarian” label, while ignoring
the political realities of humanitarian intervention
and implementation, military medical personnel in
their daily operations, often pragmatically develop
activities that may ultimately require a change in
policy and the law. Military medical personnel are
historically removed from any policy-making decisions because the Department of State has the primary role for humanitarian assistance activities.
When military health workers face human suffering in host countries, they understand that their
training combined with minimal resources can meet
some of these basic human needs through primary
care services (education, immunizations, and priMilitary Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
777
mary care diagnosis and treatment). Deployments
to underdeveloped countries, as was true in Korea,
Honduras, El Salvador, and Somalia, provide the impetus to “rethink” national policy. In deployment environments, military personnel can confuse the purely
military end with that of pursuing national policy by
other means (humanitarian assistance activities).
To preclude this confusion from occurring, military personnel should always act to support civilian or other governmental agency efforts, because
they alone will remain responsible for the overall
strategy and for the final outcome. If the exigencies
of military missions are allowed to predominate,
however, one of two things will happen: (1) the
military will leave too quickly and not have a lasting effect on humanitarian assistance programs; or
(2) the military will stay too long and take on the
task of nation building. It is my contention that the
proper role of the military should be to support the
mission of the US Department of State and move
from a “Band-Aid” approach of humanitarianism
toward strengthening the long-term nation-building roles of the Department of State and other nongovernmental agencies. After relative stability has
been achieved in military deployments on a local
country level, the military should remove itself from
the task of nation building. However, to simply say
that the military only does short-term humanitarian operations and not nation building is to ignore
the reality of the activities in between those two
tasks, as well as to ignore the effect that these humanitarian assistance programs have on host-country nationals.
This chapter will describe the evolution of military medical humanitarian assistance in the 20th
century. Although the US military also provides
disaster relief within its own borders, as needed,
this chapter will predominantly focus its attention
on those activities that take place outside the United
States. Several examples will be provided to illustrate the expanding roles of military medicine in
nation building and the associated controversies
and ethical dilemmas. The development of the role
that military medicine played in Vietnam will be
described, as well as medical assistance/civic action programs in Honduras and El Salvador. These
latter two are instances of a successful military
medical model that can be used during long-term
troop deployments abroad. Use of this model will
help avoid many of the problems described in the
next chapter in this textbook (Chapter 25, Military
Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise
of Good Intentions).
In summary, during the 20th century, the US has
increasingly involved itself in foreign aid and humanitarian assistance on a worldwide basis. Because of congressional oversight, a variety of criteria were used over the years in awarding this aid.
Economic and military aid packages were withheld
or modified if certain of these criteria were not met
by the host nation. The major criteria rested upon
the support shown to the interests of the United
States. Most notably this included the host nation’s
voting record in the United Nations, support of US
industry, import/export policy, and basing rights
for US military units. When the historical record of
US foreign aid policy is examined, it appears clear
that these humanitarian assistance programs are
motivated by political ends. This was certainly the
case in the early years of these programs.
THE BEGINNINGS OF US HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE (1900–1945)
President Wilson used food, in the form of disaster relief, in his efforts to stop the spread of civil
unrest and Bolshevism during World War I and
during the Russian famine of 1921 that followed the
end of the war. Food relief was criticized as Wilson’s
attempt to hide his purely counterrevolutionary
action12(p81) through the establishment of this relief
program, named the American Relief Administration. The program was managed by civilians and
was designed to promote and encourage American
ideology. Although the American Relief Administration was managed by a civilian organization,
soldiers served within it.
Within the context of the American Relief Administration, the US Army and its Medical Corps was
directed to undertake three missions in what was
later called nation building. The duty was hazardous because of the hostile political climate in the
deployed areas. The first of these missions involved
providing disaster relief to the refugees of Armenia who were under threat of a Russian invasion.
In 1919, active duty Army medical officers established a joint American-Armenian hospital to care
for 4,000 refugees. Over a period of a year, significant improvements were made in healthcare facilities, typhoid and smallpox vaccination programs,
and in sanitary practices.
The second nation-building mission, the American-Polish Relief Expedition (1919–1920), was developed for the elimination of typhus and the modernization of the Polish healthcare system. 13 The US
military contingent consisted of 500 enlisted men
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
778
and 12 medical officers who remained with the force
for 2 years. Some equipment was donated by the
US Army, but most was bought by the Polish government and consisted of surplus supplies from the
American Expeditionary Force (AEF). American
officers organized logistical support, administration, and educational campaigns for the control of
typhus and the institution of routine sanitary measures throughout the countryside. All aspects of the
reorganization of the Polish healthcare system were
coordinated with the Polish Ministry of Health and
civilian officials. Unfortunately, the invasion of Poland by Russia essentially negated the efforts of the
typhus quarantine. Most US personnel left the relief force because of the invasion. Quarantines became ineffectual due to the refugee problem and a
subsequent decrease in sanitary measures. Personnel losses and logistical problems further hampered
the American-Polish Relief Expedition. Any longlasting results in preventive medicine and epidemic
control were affected by the war. The mission was
considered a failure in a report by the Inspector
General (IG), US Army,13 in which the IG severely
criticized the coordination effort of the Ministry of
Health, stating that the Polish Army had the ability
to do a better job.
The third of these missions under the American
Relief Administration was set up to provide disaster relief to Russia between 1921 and 1923. 14 This
long-term relief effort included $20 million in appropriated funds for famine relief and $4 million in
medical supplies from the War Department, Navy,
and Public Health Service. Six Army officers in leadership positions were in charge of the medical effort. Army materials, under congressional approval
(with additional purchases and grants by the American Red Cross), were an essential in the distribution
effort of medical supplies and equipment. Primary
preventive health programs such as vaccination
against typhoid, paratyphoid, smallpox, and diphtheria were instituted as well as stricter sanitary
measures.
During and after World War I, the Army broadly
called this kind of assistance “disaster relief” and
the proper connotation of the term humanitarian
assistance was applied in as pure a form as possible. The military leadership of the United States
understood the potential value of this aid and used
it as a tool of foreign policy. 15 Nonetheless, the concept of disaster relief or humanitarian assistance to
be provided by the US Army in the case of national
disasters fell into disrepute as the newly created
Public Health Service, the National Guard, and the
American Red Cross increasingly took on these responsibilities. In the period between the world
wars, the Army continued to provide medical relief operations primarily because it was better
equipped to logistically support these missions.
Controversy arose about funding of equipment and
supplies provided by the Army to the Red Cross.
By 1927, many in the Army leadership resented the
fact that their budget provided for civil assistance
when their rightful job was defending the nation.
By 1937, several relief organizations, to include the
Red Cross, became politically powerful and eventually supplanted the medically related disaster
relief roles of the Army. In 1944, the role of the Army
Medical Department in national health emergencies
was legally designated to the Public Health Service.
These three examples from the World-War-I era
illustrate the intentions and goals of a US-directed
humanitarian role for medicine in foreign policy.
Admittedly, these efforts were the first steps toward
expanded missions after World War II. Can they be
used as a model for success or failure of the programs or was this only the beginning of the quandary involving the US government in foreign aid
and humanitarian assistance? This chapter will explore this question and suggest an answer.
The next phase of US military involvement in
humanitarian assistance understandably began at
the end of World War II when America emerged as
a world leader. This phase ended with the fall of
South Vietnam in 1975 to communist insurgents. In
the intervening 30 years, however, military personnel had begun to learn a great deal about what
worked, and what did not, in humanitarian assistance programs.
US HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE IN NATION
BUILDING/COUNTERINSURGENCY PROGRAMS (1945–1975)
Nation Building After World War II
The official end of World War II saw the end of
global armed conflict between sovereign nations,
the beginning of the Cold War, and the emergence
of global powers confronting one another in more
limited geographic areas (such as Korea) as well as
in numerous insurgency movements around the
world. In this immediate postwar environment,
other US government agencies provided for foreign
and domestic disaster relief with few roles given to
the Army. Even the Surplus Property Law provided
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
779
the president, through a civilian agency, the means
to transfer federal property to state or local governments. This law officially reduced the influence
of the Army to the distribution of surplus property.
By the early 1950s, most national disaster relief was
structured by law and administered under the Office of Emergency Planning. Only a few national
disasters such as the periodic floods along the Rio
Grande River and the 1964 earthquake in Alaska
demanded the services of the Army. In these instances, the ability to provide helicopter evacuation
and the rapid deployment of field hospital equipment
and personnel made Army medical help essential. 16
Reliance on civilian agencies in the early 1970s
replaced almost all utilization of the Army Medical
Department in national disasters. Although the
Army involvement in national disaster relief declined in the 1960s and 1970s, its role in foreign disaster relief became more prominent. During this Cold
War period, the US Congress discussed and developed an elaborate system of foreign aid, centered
around counterinsurgency policies and programs.
The Emergence of Counterinsurgency Policies
US counterinsurgency policies began during the
early Cold War period with the study of the wars in
Malaysia, the Philippines, and Burma between 1948
and 1961. 17(p21) The concept of counterinsur-gency
was first tested by Ramon Magsaysay in response
to the communist-supported Huk insurgence in the
Philippines after World War II. Magsaysay recognized the benefits of military civic action and provided the model by which all subsequent programs
were fashioned. His goal was to inspire his soldiers
to be good-will ambassadors of the government for
the people while still performing their primary role
in killing the insurgents. He instructed his soldiers
to assist the civilian population in meeting their
basic needs such as medical care, hygiene, and field
sanitation. Simple engineering projects to improve
rural living were also undertaken to advance the
concept of nation building by military forces.
Magsaysay’s military civic action program was
supported within the US Army with the establishment of a new Civil Affairs Office positioned under the Secretary of Defense. The original idea for
civic action and the US Army’s Civil Affairs Office
is credited to General Lansdale, an American advisor to Magsaysay. Troop instruction, psychological
warfare, public information, and civic action roles
were carried out by special advisors to field commanders. The primary doctrine of the civil affairs
mission was to gain the confidence and trust of the
civilian population in order to combat the communist influence in the countryside. Each soldier was
responsible for implementing the principles of civic
action. The association of civic action, civil affairs,
and counterinsurgency doctrine flourished and was
developed both in Southeast Asia and Latin America
as a direct consequence of the potential communist
inroads in those regions.
The Beginnings of Military Civic Action Doctrine
In 1958, because of these concerns about the rise
of communism in these areas, President Eisenhower
appointed a committee, chaired by William H.
Draper, Jr., to study the Military Assistance Program
(MAP). The 1959 Draper Committee Report recommended that serious consideration be given to the
use of indigenous forces in social and economic
development. 18 The report also provided recommendations for more integrated economic and military
assistance packages under the Mutual Security Program. 19 Numerous examples of country assistance
were cited in this report to include a very effective
program in postwar Korea (Exhibit 24-2) that had
been established in November 1953.
Influenced by the success of the program in rebuilding Korea, a mandatory civic-assistance program was funded by the United States with Security Assistance Program funds in Latin America and
Southeast Asia. Civic action programs were designated to be both the tools in nation building and
requirements of the Military Assistance Program.
In its final report, the Draper Committee reaffirmed
the philosophy that the United States should lead
the underdeveloped countries of the world toward
trade equality in a free-world community. 19 The report specifically cautioned against evaluating aid
issues with the narrow tunnel vision of Cold War
strategies. The Department of Defense approved the
recommendation for expansion of the civic action
programs in underdeveloped countries in 1960. This
expansion became the basis for the formation of US
Army military civic action doctrine. 20(pp67–79)
By the time of the release of the Draper Committee’s Report, the US Army had military assistance administrators encourage the use and training of military units in allied countries for public
works and economic development activities such
as was done in Korea. 20(p69) In June 1960, the Department of the Army alerted its military assistance
personnel abroad that civic action training teams
were available upon request to help formulate specific programs for designated countries. President
Kennedy, in a National Security Action MemoranMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
780
dum, in 1961 endorsed military civic action. 21(p77)
The US Army Special Forces’ mission developed
by President Kennedy between 1960 and 1962 was
patterned after the Philippine counterinsurgency
model. 21,22 Kennedy, as the champion of the counterinsurgency movement, was directly influenced by
its policies after visiting Vietnam in the late 1950s
when he was a senator. 23 During his brief period in
office, President Kennedy also instituted a large
program in support of host-nation military civic
action programs within Latin America. Congress
authorized funding for the Military Assistance Program as a direct response to the Draper Committee
Report. 19 The purpose of increased funding within
the Military Assistance Program was to assist those
countries in Southeast Asia and Latin America that
were fighting local insurgencies. President Kennedy,
who had first linked counterinsurgency doctrine to
the Special Forces mission in Vietnam, also linked
it within Latin America. 21 Special Forces, in their
military civic action programs, trained host-country nationals in primary healthcare and field sanitation. They also provided rudimentary healthcare
to the rural population. All of these programs were
identified with a nation-building role. The concepts
of disaster relief, with it’s implied humanitarian
mission, and military civic action were also linked
with Special Forces programs in the 1960s. 24(p147)
In a 1962 memorandum the Joint Chiefs of Staff
acknowledged that nation building, a goal of military civic action, was not foreign to the United States
Army, and has been its major task in the latter half
of the 20th century in America. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff admitted that nation-building concepts had
fallen into disuse, and that their reemergence in
military assistance programs represented a major
change in practical US military orientation. 21 With
a renewed interest in low-intensity conflict doctrine
in the mid-1980s, a Special Operations Command
(SOCOM) was established in 1987. (Exhibit 24-3
discusses the SOCOM nation-building role.)
Southeast Asia and Vietnam: Implementation of
Civic Action Programs
There is strong evidence to suggest, however, that
the US Army did not effectively alter its practical
military orientation to accommodate nation building
and military civic action in Vietnam. Civic action/
civil assistance programs in Southeast Asia, including Vietnam, were always associated with the primary
mission of training and operations of the host country military using US military personnel. A secondary role for these US military advisors and trainers
was in civil assistance programs. The secondary role
supported the host country by assisting in improvEXHIBIT 24-2
ARMED FORCES ASSISTANCE TO KOREA
The Armed Forces Assistance to Korea program was formally established in November 1953. The program
began informally as an outpouring of assistance by US military personnel in response to the war’s refugees.
US soldiers collected food and clothing to be distributed to relief organizations. This grass roots program
caught the attention of General Maxwell Taylor, the Eighth Army Commander. Congress authorized $15 million in military assistance funds followed by an additional $5 million. This is probably the first organized US
military effort in facility reconstruction funded by a Military Assistance program. It was a successful model
that accomplished many positive results. The mutual respect of the Koreans was reinforced by a positive effect
on the morale of the Americans. Most importantly, US and Korean military expertise was used in a coordinated
program to rebuild the infrastructure of civilian institutions using the economic resources of the country. Military equipment and personnel were authorized if combat readiness did not suffer. The Korean government
supplied local materials and effort. The estimated final cost of the facilities constructed was approximately
three times that of the initial investment in material and supplies. The program was directed at replacing or
repairing war-damaged facilities that benefited the majority of the local residents. Priorities established included schools, public health buildings, orphanages, civic buildings, public utilities, and bridges. A medical
program was emphasized in the Korean program that provided equipment and supplies, as well as medical
personnel.
Source: United States Congress. Senate Committee on Foreign Aid. Near East and South Asia (Subheading B), Distribution
of Military Resources to Economic and Social Progress (Annex D, June 1959). The President’s Committee to Study the United
States Military Assistance Program. Final Report. Washington, DC: US GPO; 17 August 1959: Annex D: 127–136.
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
781
ing villages’ infrastructure and took a variety of
forms. A benefit of these training programs helped
host country nationals to learn and apply their new
knowledge at the village level even after the US
military left. Some joint exercises with host country
military provided medical visits to villages. Others
involved: (a) improving sanitation (water sanitation
and well drilling, as well as sanitation in restaurants
and homes); (b) assisting in teaching and building/
repairing schools; (c) teaching crop rotation and
spraying); (d) improving transportation (road building and repairs); and (e) improving quality of life
by providing materials and services (children’s
playground, generator to show movies, roofing for
markets to enhance cleanliness, and community
support to build electric generators). 20(pp92–99) (Other
successful programs were in Korea and in the Philippines. However, unless national policy was developed and backed by the power of law and appropriations, no models for humanitarian assistance
would be developed.) A previously confidential 14
September 1968, Department of the Army study,
Nation Building Contributions of the Army (NABUCA),
admitted that civic action programs in Vietnam had
not worked because “they had failed to involve the
people.”25(pIV-16) The study went on to state that “the
major cause of the Army’s weaknesses in nation
building is the lack of qualified personnel to plan,
conduct and advise on integrated nation building
programs,”25(pIV-17) and that “few offices [sic] are
available who have the know-how to elicit people’s
participation in civic action projects. This is a skill
that requires special education and experience to
develop.”26(p213)
Although the NABUCA study does not mention
it specifically, Herrington, in an account of his adEXHIBIT 24-3
SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND
The Special Operations Command (SOCOM) was established by Congress in 1987 as it renewed its interest
and emphasis in the doctrine of low-intensity conflict (LIC) in the mid-1980s. 1 The primary mission of this
command was to prepare Special Operations Forces for rapid reinforcement of other unified commands. The
peacetime mission of these forces was to deter the escalation of violence at the low-intensity spectrum of
warfare. This mission is again linked with a nation-building role. The wartime mission is to support US conventional forces. These roles are similar to those first developed by Special Forces in Vietnam. Special Operations Command continues to emphasize a high visibility role for Special Operations Forces in nation building.
Special Operations Command doctrine dictates that civil affairs units coordinate civic action programs. 2 Except for the active duty civil affairs group assigned with the 1st Special Operations Command at Fort Bragg,
North Carolina, all others are in Reserve or National Guard units. In the Southern Command (SOUTHCOM),
a civil affairs office regulates all Reserve and National Guard training exercises in the command. General
Gorman, former Commander in Chief (CINC) of SOUTHCOM from 1983 to 1985, cautioned in a 1991 interview that the roles of Special Forces medics cannot be used interchangeably with those of medical department
personnel and their missions should not be mixed. 3 He further stated that advocates of Special Operation
Forces want others to believe that they are capable of all low-intensity conflict missions. General Gorman
specifically excluded the missions of medicine, engineering, transportation, public information, and logistics
from Special Operations Command.
Because of military deployments in Central America during the last decade the US military defined the doctrine for low-intensity conflict. Therefore, it is not surprising that the humanitarian nature of medical civic
action is so often linked with counterinsurgency doctrine in Latin America. The original large programs of the
1960s targeted medicine and engineering projects in Latin America. 4 In fact, even the Army Medical Department (AMEDD) issued its own version of this doctrine in 1990. 5 The policies and procedures found in this
doctrine incorporate the lessons learned during US Army medical deployments to Honduras in 1983.
Sources: (1) Lindsay JJ. The unified and specified commands. US GPO, Washington, DC: US GPO; December 1987: 49–52.
(2) Personal interview with Lieutenant Colonel Paul Michash, Assistant Secretary for Defense for Civil Affairs, 3 December
1990. (3) Personal interview with General Paul F. Gorman, 20 March 1991. (4) Inter-American Defense Board. Work of the
Armed Forces in the Economic and Social Development of the Countries (Military Civic Action). 8 June 1965 [internal unclassified
publication]. Available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific & Technical Information, Springfield, Va. (5) US Department of the Army. Combat Health Support in Military Operations Other Than War. Revised Final Draft. Fort Sam Houston,
Texas: US AMEDD C&S. Field Manual 8-42.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
782
visory experiences in Vietnam during 1971 and
1972, suggests that a particular quality found to be
lacking in American efforts in Vietnam was that of
cultural empathy. He stated “most Americans are
not equipped to forge an effective working relationship with their Vietnamese counterparts,”26(p213) and
added “the cultural and linguistic barriers were almost impossible to break.”26(p214)
The NABUCA study hinted that a new concept
was being developed to remedy the situation. The
new effort came to be known as the “Civil Operations,
Revolutionary Development Support” (CORDS).
Conceding that the individual and diffused efforts
of the US Army, the US Agency for International
Development (USAID), the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA), and the US Information Service
(USIS) were failing, President Johnson authorized
the formation of CORDS. CORDS became the operational head for all 44 provinces and 271 districts
in South Vietnam between 1967 and 1972. 27 US military advisers and civilian specialists from USAID,
USIS, and the CIA were told to win the “hearts and
minds” of the rural Vietnamese. McCollum, who
has written about CORDS and its successes, alleges
almost unqualified success for the CORDS program
prior to the 1973 US withdrawal. 27 The CORDS effort in Vietnam was somewhat effective because it
was operating under a single manager concept, but
was doomed to failure because it lacked other necessary ingredients for success. There was neither
full central support of the government nor support
at the level of the provincial village chiefs to allow
villagers to become independent. The power of the
host-country military and the provincial chiefs over
the civilian population interfered with the development of other village leaders for fear of losing
their own power. Additionally, as the war escalated,
with increasing manpower losses, fewer soldiers
were available to do civic assistance activities. 21(pp273–
277) Regardless of the specific impact of CORDS,
McCollum’s article calls attention to the fact that
successes achieved in Vietnam during pacification
have been obscured by the overall negative nature
of the conflict’s outcome.
With the impending US military failure in Vietnam, turning the fighting over to the South Vietnamese military, the US troop drawdown, and the
ongoing peace negotiations (which sought the release of US prisoners of war and the withdrawal of
US forces), the US public voiced a strong desire to
reduce direct military involvement abroad. Economic support of foreign military forces was becoming unpopular, accompanied by increasing sentiment that foreign aid programs were of little
benefit. 28(pp51,171–173) In a scathing report published in
1972, the US Congress urged the creation of a Developmental Assistance Program under the administration of USAID that was distinctly separate from
the Security Assistance Program. This new program
strengthened the nation-building role for USAID
and further removed this mission from the DoD.
It is a truism that the Vietnam debacle elicited a
US Army movement away from military civic action and low-intensity warfare, and back to the security of a conventional tactical doctrine in which
it had great success in World War I and World War
II. Blaufarb contends that this shift occurred just
after the final North Vietnamese offensive of 1975. 21
As such, military civic action as a viable concept
only survived 14 years, hardly enough time for it
to be understood and applied during the chaotic
Vietnam era.
Despite the many controversies regarding the US
involvement in Vietnam, the Surgeon General of the
US Army, Leonard D. Heaton, emphasized that political opportunities provided by medical civic action
programs could improve America’s foreign relations. 29 He saw that military medicine could improve people-to-people relations in underdeveloped
countries and could be a model for these nations to
follow. It is my opinion that the model of Medical
Civil Action Programs (MEDCAPs) developed during the Vietnam war influenced the development,
implementation, and transition to a modern concept
of humanitarian assistance missions for deployed
troops in regional conflicts abroad. The development of the model, however, did not come easily,
nor was it immediate.
THE CHANGING CONCEPT OF NATION BUILDING (1975–2000)
The Aftermath of the Vietnam War
Nation building and civic action, as useful missions for the Special Forces, fell into disrepute after
the communist unification of Vietnam in 1975. Budget and manpower cuts of up to 95% followed as
the mission of the Special Forces was changed. The
US government shifted its focus from counterinsurgency threats to foreign policy conflicts with the
former Soviet Union. With the emergence of worldwide terrorism, exemplified during the administration of President Carter with the seizure of the US
Embassy and staff in Tehran, Iran in 1979, a strategy of military readiness in the form of “quick reMilitary Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
783
action” forces was developed. Unfortunately, the
mission failure of the Special Operations forces that
deployed to rescue the US Embassy hostages in Iran
in 1980 served to highlight the weaknesses of the
organization and planning of that joint services’
mission. Since then, the use of Special Forces in support of American objectives in foreign policy has
again been successful. The most recent example is
their use in October 2001 as “quick reaction” forces
in Afghanistan, to aid in the overthrow of a government that harbored terrorist organizations.
In the early 1980s, in the subsequent Reagan administration, the focus shifted to counterinsurgency
movements in Central America. As a consequence,
the doctrine for low-intensity conflict was reviewed,
which stimulated a rethinking of the role of Special
Forces. The previous (and original) counter-insurgency doctrine was developed in the Philippines
and was applied to Latin America and Southeast
Asia by US military forces. The medical doctrine
for low-intensity conflict was written in the mid1980s. 30 Cold War politics was thus responsible for
linking military civic action programs with the
counterinsurgency movement and its doctrine for
the next 20 years.
It should be remembered that the military involvement in Vietnam had demonstrated the benefits of nation building through congressionally
mandated assistance programs. Military leaders,
many of whom were Vietnam veterans, framed the
policy questions and developed the strategies for
future humanitarian assistance programs in Central America.
In this chapter I will discuss two of these programs, those in Honduras and El Salvador, as examples of successes. Both were under the purview
of the Southern Command (SOUTHCOM), US
Army (see Exhibit 24-4). Although the goals of these
two programs were essentially the same—nation
building leading to regional stabilization—their legal basis differed. The Salvadoran government
chose to use Security Assistance Program funding
for Foreign Military Sales (as previously described)—
funds provided by the United States government
for medical assistance rather than for military training and weaponry—because of the protracted civil
war in El Salvador. Prior to the change in law in
1985, the medical civic action activities in Honduras were developed as part of medical exercises for
deployed US medical, dental, and veterinary personnel in an effort to maintain their skills and proficiency. However, the El Salvadoran MTT program
trained host-country military medical personnel in
trauma and evacuation procedures, whereas in
Honduras, the primary health care needs of the civilian population were addressed. In both countries,
these exercises were generally welcomed and supported. Even though these two programs essentially
ran concurrently, they will be discussed separately
in this chapter, beginning with Honduras (as that
was the country that came to the attention of the
US Congress as it reviewed the role of the DoD in
the early days of military humanitarian assistance
missions.) But first, a brief description of the overall situation in Central America when these medical exercises were instituted will help establish the
context in which these humanitarian assistance programs were undertaken.
Nation Building in Central America: The
Background
In the late 1970s and early 1980s Central America
was in turmoil. In 1979, a protracted war in El Salvador was under way, fought by at least five separate guerilla forces. Fidel Castro, the communist
leader of Cuba, convinced the separate guerilla
forces in El Salvador to unite under the Farabundo
Martí National Liberation Front with its main purpose to overthrow the existing government by violent means. Arms shipments from Cuba and the
former Soviet Union were funneled into the country by way of Nicaragua, which also supported
training for the insurgents. The United States sought
to counter these guerilla efforts by providing military support to the elected government of El Salvador through the Military Security Assistance Program and foreign military sales. 31,32
From 1979 to 1983, the El Salvadoran Armed
Forces (ESAF) had increased from 12,000 to 40,000
soldiers to combat the random attacks of these guerilla forces. 33 The ESAF and the Security Assistance
Forces (US military acting as advisors [a very small
number were allowed by the US Congress]) used a
variety of means to reduce these random attacks on
military and civilian targets. 34 After a change in
ESAF tactics (to employing smaller units) additional
successes were achieved through the use of an information campaign, intense civil defense programs, and military civic action programs. Over a
4-year period the estimated number of insurgents
decreased from a high of 11,000 to about 8,000 in
1983. However, in response to the increased weaponry and equipment of the ESAF, a significant
change occurred in the tactics of the guerilla forces.
Their new emphasis was on small ambushes, terrorist attacks, and sabotage, with a high priority
given to the use of land mines. This rapid transiMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
784
EXHIBIT 24-4
SOUTHERN COMMAND
Southern Command (SOUTHCOM) commanders have actively pursued an aggressive policy to provide engineering services through civic action programs in Honduras. Engineering projects, the most accepted US civic
action programs, are more tangible and are intuitively more acceptable in a cost-benefit analysis. In spite of
their success, however, criticism has also been directed toward these engineering programs, especially when
the policy of the host foreign nation does not or cannot support collaboration in joint projects. Medical civic
action programs also have been criticized for both their methods and their achieved results. Most of these
criticisms are made by various US governmental agencies or by other nongovernmental healthcare planners.
Since the law was enacted in 1985 to allow DoD to provide humanitarian/civic action (H/CA) programs in
locations throughout the world, the Southern Command has consistently had the largest H/CA program, with
significant successes in medical, dental, veterinary, and engineering programs. Of the various SOUTHCOM
H/CA Programs, only the Medical Element, Joint Task Force Bravo at Soto Cano, Honduras, has been able to
provide a long-term medical model, due to the continued presence of US forces. SOUTHCOM commanders
had expected to replicate this model throughout the Americas and to export it around the world.
Despite the high visibility of the Medical Element, Joint Task Force Bravo, SOUTHCOM reports still classified
most medical civic action projects as small in sheer numbers. For instance, in the SOUTHCOM FY (fiscal year)
1991 recommendations for humanitarian/civic assistance projects, only 33 of 234 projects (approximately 14%)
were medical. 1 No medical projects were listed separately for Honduras but some were included with the
engineering projects. These included the 24 (out of 125) engineering projects that involved digging of wells
(the remaining 101 involved the construction or repair of schools). General Jowlwan, the SOUTHCOM Commander in Chief reviewed the information and reclassified this number to 80 of the 234 total projects. 2 Still,
this is a paucity of medical training exercises in the overall program.
The Inter-American Defense Board Staff published an extensive list of “military civic action” projects in Latin
America. 3 The thrust of the work was to define this nebulous term. Here it was defined in its broadest terms
and meant any contribution of the military to the economic or social development of their country. For example, Chile established a Military Work Corps under the direction of the Commander-in-Chief of the Army.
Colombia established a national Committee on Military Civic Action. The committee consisted of the ministers of government, war, agriculture, public health, national education, public works, and any private organizations that would work toward the same common goal. This organization seemed to be the most inclusive
and was directed toward a cohesive plan at the highest political levels of the country. In a review of the projects
in Latin America, health, sanitation, and education projects dominated. The coordinated activities of the US
Medical Element, Joint Task Force Bravo directed their missions at this level.
Another productive exercise for the US Army Medical Department is the deployment for training exercises
(DTEs) such as the maxillo-facial surgery teams. 4 US surgeons are deployed in these surgical readiness training exercises to maintain reconstructive surgery skills. These exercises consist of a team to repair facial deformities, such as cleft lips and palates, for Honduran civilians. Facilities are donated by the Honduran government to include bed space, operating rooms, and pre- and postoperative nursing care. These exercises provide
an opportunity to maintain essential skills for plastic, otolaryngology, and oral surgeons in the US military
because the frequency of these operations is lower in the United States. It provided the Honduran medical
system a way to increase the number of these procedures that benefit the health of their countrymen. The
liaison medical doctor for the Honduran Ministry of Health coordinates this highly successful joint effort.
These US medical teams still provide this care to the large numbers of indigent patients who are unable to
obtain treatment in Honduran public hospitals and clinics. The main public medical center, the Hospital Escuela,
is limited in operating time and the regional hospitals do not have the specialists to perform these procedures.
Sources: (1) Memorandum for Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Wolthuis, Subject: United States Southern Command
FY 91 H/CA Nominations, dated 30 July 1990. Author: William W. Hartzog, BG, USA Director, J#, Department of Defense,
United States Southern Command, Quarry Heights, Panama. (2) Telephone interview, 22 March 1991 with General George
A. Jowlwan, SOUTHCOM CINC. (3) Inter-American Defense Board. Work of the Armed Forces in the Economic and Social
Development of the Countries (Military Civic Action). 8 June 1965 [internal unclassified publication]. Available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific & Technical Information, Springfield, VA. (4) Colonel George E. Smith, Plastic Surgery in Honduras, Information Paper, 28 October 1987.
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
785
tion from a peacetime stance of limited garrison
healthcare to a wartime posture required widespread use of competent field medical treatment,
rapid evacuation, and comprehensive surgical and
rehabilitative care to treat the casualties of land
mine warfare.
By 1983 these activities in Central America were
clearly of military interest to the United States. As
already mentioned, El Salvador was in turmoil.
Nicaragua was unstable with the Contra civil war,
and Guatemala was fighting an insurgency. Honduras was also affected by the regional strife and
was preparing to defend itself. Officials in Honduras indicated they intended to mobilize their country for quick air strikes into Nicaragua. The Costa
Ricans had experienced repeated Nicaraguan incursions as well and were no doubt considering their
military options.
Instability in Central America was of concern to
the US Congress. In an effort to minimize or contain the influences of communism in Central
America (eg, Nicaragua, insurgent activity in Guatemala and El Salvador), Congress authorized and
appropriated funding for low-intensity conflict programs. General Gorman, as the SOUTHCOM CINC,
was responsible for the strategy and program execution of these programs. His oversight included
all activities in Central and South America to include medical programs.
The CINCs and their existing and new programs
are reviewed and justified in a congressional oversight process. Any US assistance or intervention in
the region would require congressional approval
and funding, as well as extensive planning and coordination by his senior command staff and the
Department of State. Such an intervention would
also require the deployment of medical assets. However, up until 1983, SOUTHCOM did not have a
command surgeon to formally advise the CINC regarding medical issues in the geographic region
assigned to SOUTHCOM. The Commander of
Gorgas Army Hospital was the informal advisor to
the CINC, SOUTHCOM, but knew little about the
medical problems in the region. Consequently, General Gorman authorized a new position, Command
Surgeon, SOUTHCOM, to advise him on medical
problems within his region. General Gorman, working with his command staff, developed a plan for
civic action/nation building military exercises in
Central America. With the US shift in focus to Central America, Honduras was a logical choice for
beginning a nation building effort because it was
still neutral and welcomed a US presence to deter
further regional conflicts.
In his congressional report in the spring of 1983,
General Gorman stated his three outcome goals for
exercises to be conducted in Honduras. First, all
operations should improve readiness of the armed
forces of Honduras and in so doing deter regional
conflict. 35 Second, all exercises should have a legitimate training value for both US and Honduran
forces. And finally, all exercises should provide a
tangible benefit to Honduras as the host country.
Additional activities would pursue causes that advanced US national interests, some of which were
of a classified nature. In a hearing with the Armed
Services Committee in May 1983, General Gorman
also offered three reasons why the US should deploy troops to Honduras by that August: (1) to deter the Honduran military mobilization and invasion into Nicaragua; (2) to convince the military
leadership of Honduras to prepare for defense of
their country; and (3) to reassure the government
of Costa Rica of US support in the region. 35 At all
times during their deployment, the United States
would remain neutral in this effort to deter violence
in the region. And, as part of the deployment force,
there would be medical assets as necessary to maintain the health of the US forces.
The Beginning of the DoD Humanitarian
Mission in Central America
Several medical officers who had formerly served
in Vietnam (including myself) were assigned as
medical personnel supporting US deployed military
forces in Honduras in 1983. The stated mission of
the US hospital was to provide care for the US
troops in Honduras. In an interview with the hospital commander, it became apparent that the training mission and the medical readiness mission of
his personnel were also of primary importance. 36
He reasoned that just as line officers use weapons
or maneuvers for their readiness training, medicine
and the maintenance of diagnostic and treatment
skills were the tools for medical training.
However, because medical readiness is not often
tested in a young healthy population of US soldiers,
the US hospital commander also wanted medical
readiness and the maintenance of professional skills
to be a mission requirement. The skills needed for
deployments and the ability to practice medicine
under austere conditions would prepare his staff
for worldwide medical readiness. If the daily training of his medical professionals was restricted to
the care of US soldiers only, a loss of skill would
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
786
occur during their temporary duty deployment of
6 months. Treating Honduran nationals could prevent this skill loss. Additionally, the individual
benefits of dealing with healthcare in developing
nations provided a personal satisfaction that few
US healthcare professionals had previously experienced coming from a high-technology milieu.
General Gorman’s agenda in Honduras was to use,
as feasible, the US hospital as a resource to assist in
improving some of the basic health problems of the
Honduran armed forces. In addition, hospital inpatient care of Honduran nationals could be rendered
on a space-available basis. The US Army medical officers who were assigned to Honduras were convinced
of the value of a medical program based on their past
experiences in Vietnam and what they saw in Honduras. They initiated a MEDCAP similar to those they
had conducted in Vietnam.
General Gorman, with the first command surgeon in Honduras, Colonel Russ Zajtchuk, began
the joint medical training mission concept with a
broad-based program of interaction between the US
and Honduran medical forces and the civilian community. In the Honduran armed forces, field medicine and sanitation precautions were inadequate.
Immunizations, malarial prophylaxis, and antisnake
bite venom was provided sporadically because of
lack of supplies and inadequate logistical support.
Simple emergency care provided by a combat medic
was nonexistent. The situation was so severe that
many soldiers refused deployment to areas of high
health risks or to remote areas without doctors.
Medical evacuation and logistical support were
rudimentary.
The president of Honduras, who was also a physician, was certainly concerned about the difficulties of providing healthcare to his soldiers, but he
also had another health concern: the assumed potential for US military troops to harbor and spread
what is now known as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Extensive adverse
publicity with incomplete data of the etiology and
transmission of this health hazard was just appearing in the early 1980s in the US press. The issue of
identification and control of the disease in the US
military troops stationed in Honduras was important. The president’s concerns were addressed by
attaching a US Army hospital to the US task force.
General Gorman was convinced of the critical importance of the hospital in influencing the president’s
decision in favor of stationing US troops in Honduras. He testified that the deployment of medical
personnel “was the sine qua non for SOUTHCOM’s
program and the US presence in Honduras. Had we
not had the US hospital, we would have lost the
game.”35 Locating the US hospital in the area of
highest troop concentration would assure that the
health problems of US troops would be handled
immediately by US medical personnel.
On the basis of a review of Honduran troop readiness, General Gorman urged their armed forces
commander and chief of staff to delay any mobilization against Nicaragua in favor of further training for their armed forces. 35 He emphasized the
details of what was necessary to deploy an army in
the field as well as how to address Honduran security concerns without recourse to violence. Both of
these needs could best be met by Honduran participation in joint training exercises. These exercises
would strengthen their military readiness capabilities that would then become a powerful tool in deterring regional conflict. This, then, was the basis
of the original project model in Honduras. It was
similar in execution to the medical civic action programs in Vietnam.
As a result of these interactions between Honduran and US forces, it was possible for the logistical, organizational, and preventive medicine expertise of the medical element to build a collaborative
framework to bring healthcare to rural areas. (See
Exhibit 24-5 for a further discussion of the evolution of the medical elements in Honduras.) Honduran citizens, primarily in remote mountain areas,
now saw their own country medical personnel
working to treat them. It was not unusual for these
people to have never seen medical healthcare workers. Honduran healthcare workers were deeply
moved to work side-by-side with Americans to treat
the Honduran populace.
It is my assessment, based on my experience in
Honduras, that the host-country private, public,
and military healthcare systems were strengthened,
some of the health needs of the rural areas were
identified and corrected, and a caring side of both
the nation and the US military and medical personnel was evident as a direct result of this program.
Providing for some of the very basic needs in primary care treatment and health education programs
for these people was the least controversial means
to assist developing nations in Central America.
During this transition period to democracy, the DoD
National Security Strategy initiatives (drafted in
1983) in SOUTHCOM were advanced. The Humanitarian Task Force Report, which detailed these activities and accomplishments, was forwarded to the
Secretary of Defense.
In 1984 the Secretary of Defense approved the
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
787
EXHIBIT 24-5
US MILITARY MEDICAL UNITS IN HONDURAS
Since the inception of the civic action programs in Honduras, there have been three medical units involved: (1) the
41st Combat Support Hospital, (2) the 47th Field Hospital, and (3) the Medical Element, Joint Task Force Bravo.
1.
41st Combat Support Hospital, Fort Sam Houston, Texas (August 1983–February 1984). Colonel Russ Zajtchuk,
Commanding. The 41st Combat Support Hospital was complemented by two Medical Companies (546th [CLR]
and 690th [AMB] from Fort Benning, Georgia); D Company, 326th Medical Battalion [Air Ambulance Company] from Fort Campbell, Kentucky; the 225th Preventive Medical Detachment [LC] from Fort Sill, Oklahoma;
and the 73rd Veterinary Detachment [JA] from Fort Jackson, South Carlina. The number of Army personnel
supporting the exercise named AHUAS TARA (Spanish for “Big Pine”) was 421. This Army Combat Support
Hospital deployed from Fort Sam Houston, Texas, to support approximately 12,000 US soldiers during AHUAS
TARA II (Big Pine II), and joint US-Honduran exercises. The hospital was set up in a 200-bed configuration of
inflatable units supported by six U-packs (inflatable units) to maintain inflation and heating and air conditioning. Billeting was all under tents. Water buffaloes were the source of all drinking water. Human waste was
disposed of using burn-out latrines and soakage pits. Medical evacuation within country was accomplished
using six UH-60 Blackhawk MEDEVAC (medical evacuation) helicopters configured as air ambulances. Having the helicopters under the control of the hospital commander permitted large numbers of medical training
missions through the provision of humanitarian assistance. The highly successful immunization program was
largely due to logistical air support and in-country coordination with Honduran officials.
2.
47th Field Hospital, Fort Sill, Oklahoma (February 1984–August 1984). Colonel John Hutton, Commanding. This Army field hospital deployed from Fort Sill, Oklahoma to Palmerola Air Base with approximately 225 personnel to support the GRANADERO (Spanish for “grenadier”) I exercises of Joint Task
Force Alpha. By June of 1984, medical staffing numbers ranged from 50 to 90 and was able to serve a 15bed hospital with expansion capabilities to 30, one operating room and one triage area during the transition of the Palmerola Air Base (now Soto Cano Air Base) to Joint Task Force Bravo. Tents were used for
both hospital and billeting functions. Water buffaloes were still the source of all drinking water. Human
waste was still disposed of using burn-out latrines and soakage pits.
3.
Medical Element, Joint Task Force Bravo (August 1984–present); Lieutenant Colonel Lou A. Popejoy, Commanding (August 1984–February 1985); Colonel Joan T. Zajtchuk, Commanding (February 1985–September 1985). The medical element manning document consisted of two-thirds Army and one-third Air Force
medical personnel until June 1985. Air Force rotations were every 3 months; Army rotations were every 6
months. After this date, the entire unit consisted of Army medical personnel rotating for 6 months. The
long-standing presence of this Medical Element continues to assist not only US troops but supports medical exercises for the benefit of Honduras such as assistance during Hurricane Mitch, the recurrent joint
activities with the Ministry of Health, and the Honduran Military and the maxillofacial DTFs (dental treatment facilities). The previous hospital and its adjacent buildings and personnel billeting now used elevated Central American Type (CAT) wooden huts. The operating room was a 12 x 20 foot, double-walled
box. Air conditioning of the hospital CAT huts was completed by June 1985. Billeting quarters were improved at this time to provide foot and wall lockers, and beds instead of cots. Two UH-1H helicopters
supported the Medical Element Mission for air evacuation. A motor pool supplied all heavy duty trucks
for land missions. The schedule consisted of alternate weeks of one land mission and three air missions.
Air missions required the use of Chinook helicopters to transport personnel and supplies. Until July 1985,
when medical service corps officers were assigned, medical corps officers were utilized for planning and
operations, medical logistic support and for all administrative actions.
The program has made steady progress in Honduras, although at times it has been very slow. For instance, construction plans for a permanent hospital for the Medical Element were developed and signed in 1985; the hospital was
built by US engineers in 1991. As the Task Force presence became more permanent, sanitary facilities were brought
up to standards. The mission was to (1) provide area medical support to US forces in Honduras: (a) Air ambulance
evacuation, (b) veterinary activities such as meat inspection, oversight of the dining facilities, health and quality
standards of the Post Exchange, and the health of Military Police dogs (c) Preventive Medical oversight to all units
(water and waste management, vector control, oversight of food preparation, prevention and control of sexually
transmitted diseases); (2) conduct unit Readiness Training Exercises for (a) medical, dental, and veterinary activities
(b) to maintain an Emergency Medical Response Team (a rapid response medical team that can be deployed quickly
for trauma situations or natural disasters), and (c) conduct simulated mass casualty exercises; (3) provide logistical
and operational support base for US continental-based medical units deployed to Honduras for training (Reserve
and National Guard units, and two rotations for training of Special Forces Medics).
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
788
Humanitarian Task Force Report. The Department
of Defense’ Office of Humanitarian Assistance,
OPR: OSD/ISA (Global Affairs), was created that
same year as a direct result of recommendations of
the Department of Defense Humanitarian Task
Force Report. The Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Policy was given the authority to coordinate all of the Humanitarian Assistance activities
within DoD. In September 1984, Dr. Robert K.
Wolthuis, Special Assistant to the Deputy Undersecretary, was made the first DoD Coordinator and
Director for Humanitarian Assistance. This office
also addressed the distribution of surplus equipment and supplies and was integrated with hostnation civilian and military medical activities. As
an example, civilian organizations abroad could
request equipment and supplies. Transportation
funding would be provided by this office. Each
branch of military service was directed to provide a
civilian or military officer as the liaison to the office.
Despite the humanitarian nature of this new program, the creation of this office and with it a perception about its influences on a nation-building
role for the Department of Defense had negative connotations. 37 This was due to the previous association
of civic action programs with counterinsurgency
and low-intensity conflict doctrine in Vietnam.
(These negative connotations were widespread and
persisted for more than a decade after US withdrawal from Vietnam. For example, a US military
pediatrician stationed in Honduras attempted to
purchase a copy of Where There Is No Doctor, the
practical rural-health textbook. The sale was refused
in a written reply by the book’s author who stated
that the roles of military medicine and humanitarian assistance represented conflicting motives. 38) Dr.
Wolthuis, the first Director of this policy office,
shared the concern regarding the negative connotations that so closely associated Special Forces with
medical civic action programs. As a result, Special
Forces missions were excluded in the funding process. Dr. Wolthuis was convinced that the Department
of Defense, despite its past negative publicity, could
participate in assisting developing countries by
performing smaller projects in the larger context of
a nation-building role of the Department of State.
By mid-1984, General Gorman’s initiative in attaching a military hospital that provided care to Hondurans had come to the attention of the Government
Accounting Office (GAO). A May 1984 GAO report
criticized DoD, and specifically SOUTHCOM, for expending appropriations for humanitarian/civic assistance mission for which it had no authority. 39 The
report noted that the US hospital commander and
command surgeon for Honduras had used medical
supplies, logistical support for deployment to remote villages, and US military hospital facilities for
purely humanitarian/civic assistance missions of
direct benefit to the host nation.
Despite the critical GAO report, a gradual maturing of the program goals had evolved into an
acceptable working model that ultimately assuaged
the various critics. These medical training exercises
were of particular interest to the US Congress. The
issue to be resolved was whether or not there would
be authority granted to officially provide for an
expanded role for humanitarian assistance in Department of Defense missions.
This section about the role SOUTHCOM played
in the development of humanitarian assistance doctrine would be lacking without the comments of
General Maxwell R. Thurman. He influenced the
programs in SOUTHCOM through his successors
such as General Gorman and General Jowlwan. He
supported the development of a medical model so
that military-to-military partnerships could be effectively developed. He was the “soldier’s soldier”
and recognized the discrepancies in the provision
of healthcare in foreign military forces as compared
to US standards. He wanted to provide a training
program addressing these shortfalls so that basic
needs of the soldier could be met. His death in 1995
culminated a long and productive Army career. He
was responsible for modernizing the US Army and
was a champion of military medicine (Exhibit 24-6).
Formalizing the Role of the Department of
Defense
After lengthy congressional debate, the Department of Defense was authorized to use operational
and maintenance funds in May 1985 for humanitarian/civic assistance projects if the expenses incurred
were “incidental to authorized operations.”36 What
was considered incidental was not specifically delineated but was, in general, training of an informal nature where both the host forces and the US
forces benefited. For example, in a Medical Readiness Training Exercise (MEDRETE) in Honduras,
both Honduran military and civilian health personnel and their US counterparts would deploy to remote
areas (Figure 24-1). A variety of medical services
were provided to include:
• immunizations, clinical evaluations (Figure
24-2), and dental extractions (Figure 24-3);
• veterinary examinations and immunizations (in cooperation with Honduran veterinarians) (Figure 24-4);
• preventive medicine lectures;
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
789
• patient referrals (to regional civilian clinics and hospitals for follow-up care) (Figure 24-5); and
• disease data collection (for the Ministry of
Health to ascertain overall healthcare level
of the nation).
Patients requiring urgent care were transported directly to the US hospital or to regional hospitals.
These joint-training exercises, even with their limitations, provided valuable training to US military
medical personnel working under austere conditions. They also provided the logistical support for
Honduran healthcare workers to provide care in
their own underserved rural communities.
Although Congress, via the Steven’s Amendment
in Fiscal Year (FY) 1985,40 only addressed medical
humanitarian activities in conjunction with authorized military exercises in Central America, it gradually expanded the mission description to include a
broader range of activities. It was implemented later
in worldwide deployments for all military branches
and a 5-year budget ceiling was mandated.
The Department of Defense program that provided humanitarian assistance in conjunction with
EXHIBIT 24-6
GENERAL THURMAN’S EVALUATION OF MEDICAL MILITARY CIVIC ACTION
General Maxwell R. Thurman, when he was the Commander in Chief, Southern Command (CINC,
SOUTHCOM), completed a 5-year program to include military civic action within complementary DoD programs for the region. In an interview I conducted in May 1991 with General Thurman after his retirement, he
shared his goal for the medical benefits of all related civic action programs in Latin America. That goal included a plan to provide the same basic healthcare resources and education as provided for US military forces
to be implemented in programs for the field medical and casualty care of all conscripted soldiers in Latin
America. Even under ideal circumstances this would have been a daunting task considering the medical capabilities of the various countries compared to the level of healthcare provided to United States forces. Circumstances were (and continue to be) considerably less than ideal due to disruptions associated with narcotics
traffic, civil unrest, a lack of general support of the US military model, issues of national sovereignty, and the
lack of resources.
To better understand how there was such a paucity of existing medical exercises in SOUTHCOM, I asked
General Thurman to comment on these low numbers. It was his opinion that a medical model needed to be
developed for the use of the military group commanders. This model would have to address healthcare at the
host country political level so that they would accept the value of the partnership to improve their military
health standards. General Thurman’s goals were twofold. One was to have all engineering projects include an
accompanying medical training exercise. This medical program must be directed to a level of healthcare learning interactions rather than on the “Band-Aid” approach. His second goal was to develop a coordinated program to teach Latin American military forces the basic requirements for the maintenance of healthy troops.
This would include adequate rations, preventive and field medicine, and adequate combat trauma care. This
is the unmet long-term goal that still requires the interaction of both the civilian and military healthcare system at a national level. This goal can be realized by integrating a variety of Army Medical Department training
programs and personnel exchanges such as the Subject Matter Expert Exchange Program. The CINC,
SOUTHCOM should be instrumental in highlighting this concept with US agencies and foreign militaries.
Fig. 24-1. Villagers approach UH-60 medical helicopter
providing transport for US military and Honduran military and civilian medical personnel and supplies for a
humanitarian assistance mission in a remote mountain
village in Honduras. Without this logistic support, most
regions were totally inaccessible for medical care. Photograph: Courtesy of Joan Zajtchuk, MD, from the combined collection of photographs taken by members of
Joint Task Force Bravo, Honduras (1983–1985).
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
790
US military operations prompted Congress to authorize and fund a more general DoD program in
1987. The permanent authority under Title 10, Chapter 20–Humanitarian and Other Assistance, Sec. 401
includes: (a) medical, dental, and veterinary care
provided in rural areas of a country; (b) construction of rudimentary surface transportation; (c) well
drilling and construction of basic sanitation facilities; (d) rudimentary construction and repair of
public facilities; and (e) detection and clearance of
land mines. Projects initiated under this authorization must promote the security interests of both the
United States and the host country and must also
promote specific operational readiness skills for US
military personnel who participate in the activities.
Under this new legal authority, the role of the
DoD Office of Humanitarian Assistance shifted to
providing policy. This office has no budget to directly support programs in humanitarian assistance
and civic action; its function is to coordinate and
oversee those H/CA activities that are “in conjunction with authorized military operations of the
armed forces in a country.” In this capacity it must
serve the basic economic and social needs of the
country in which the assistance is given. AdditionFig. 24-3. US military dentist extracting infected or severely decayed teeth in an adult. Under these conditions,
restorative dental care was not an option. Honduran
medical personnel taught dental hygiene in classrooms
of the village school. Photograph: Courtesy of Joan
Zajtchuk, MD, from the combined collection of photographs taken by members of Joint Task Force Bravo,
Honduras (1983–1985).
Fig. 24-2. (a) Military police personnel assist the medical
team effort in unpacking medical supplies. In the background, villagers are being triaged for medical diagnosis and treatment. (b) A US Army physician and nurse
examine an infant to diagnose a middle-ear infection.
Photographs: Courtesy of Joan Zajtchuk, MD, from the
combined collection of photographs taken by members
of Joint Task Force Bravo, Honduras (1983–1985).
a
b
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
791
ally, the projects must have Department of State
approval and must be coordinated with the USAID
Bureau for Program and Policy Coordination to
preclude duplication of other US government programs. The office focuses its coordinating efforts on
surplus property disposal, transportation, disaster
relief, civic action, and medical assistance.
In the past, jurisdiction had been given to the
Department of State and USAID for roles in humanitarian assistance missions at the international level.
Clearly any new role in humanitarian/civic action
assistance for the Department of Defense had to be
in support of existing federal agencies that were
funded to perform this work. The new DoD program, therefore, required a memorandum of understanding between the DoD, the Department of State,
and USAID to insure coordination of the projected
Department of Defense H/CA programs.
Honduras: Military Medicine in Civic Action
Programs—The SOUTHCOM Model
A series of events, beginning in 1983 with the
increased interest in Central America, flowing
Fig. 24-5. A Honduran child and family member from a
remote mountain village await UH-60 helicopter transportation for further diagnosis and treatment at the 41st
Combat Support Hospital. Photograph: Courtesy of Joan
Zajtchuk, MD, from the combined collection of photographs taken by members of Joint Task Force Bravo,
Honduras (1983–1985).
Fig. 24-4. (a) A US Army veterinarian specialist provides
oral treatment for intestinal parasites in a horse. Horses
were also immunized against Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis. (b) Pigs are receiving oral treatment for intestinal parasites. They were also immunized against cholera. Joint US-Honduran teams provided the expertise.
Lieutenant General Bernhardt Mittemeyer, Surgeon General, US Army, observes treatment. Photographs: Courtesy of Joan Zajtchuk, MD, from the combined collection
of photographs taken by members of Joint Task Force
Bravo, Honduras (1983–1985).
a
b
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
792
through General Gorman’s initiative to use medical assets in SOUTHCOM to also care for Honduran
soldiers and civilians, had now come to program
implementation with the initial Stevens Amendment in 1985, and the subsequent Stevens Amendment in 1987 that expanded the program and gave
it a legal basis. The latter had specified parameters
and provided a budget for its implementation. It
was now the authorized task of SOUTHCOM, in
association with the Honduran government, to fully
(and officially) implement the program.
Three parameters were to guide all of SOUTHCOM’s humanitarian efforts in Latin America. Military exercises were to (1) improve readiness of
armed forces to deter regional conflict, (2) have a
legitimate training benefit for both US forces and
those of the host country, and (3) be of obvious benefit to the host country. This was the mandate given
to SOUTHCOM by the Congress in 1987. This mandate was gradually redefined as these training exercises came to be identified as medical civic action
projects by both US commanders and Honduran
nationals.
By 1989, the term “civic action” had replaced the
term “medical readiness training exercises”
(MEDRETEs). This substitution, however, confused
the goal of the medical exercises. Humanitarian assistance and civic action were supposed to be a
product of the training exercise, not the goal. Honduras had historically benefited from some small
military civic action programs in engineering that
were started in the 1960s under the Military Assistance Program (MAP). Medical exercises are still
influenced by the past concept of this term. The attachment of medical personnel to complement all
short-term civic action missions within engineer
deployments is quite different than the more recent
medical readiness training exercises. All healthcare
operations, both United States’ and Honduran
(whether in conjunction with engineering projects
or as strictly medical readiness training exercises),
were designed to benefit the public health needs of
the country. This entailed an extraordinary coordinating effort by the commander of the medical element with all Honduran civilian and military health
agencies and providers. The influence of the former
context of military civic action was apparent when
the government of Honduras created the Office of
Civic Action within the armed forces to plan and
coordinate the corresponding military medical operations. 41 This, then, was the evolution of the program in Honduras during its first half dozen years,
from approximately 1983 through 1989.
The successful civic action program in Honduras is unique because of the long duration of continuing US troop presence in Honduras (since 1983).
Generally, civic action programs have only been
used with a minimal or sporadic US military presence. A review of the program in Honduras demonstrates the extensive coordination and planning
by the military with all governmental, public, and
private healthcare stakeholders. The program provides primary healthcare in remote rural areas, to
include vaccinations, instruction in rudimentary
preventive medicine principles, and primary care
treatment. Host-country civilian and military healthcare workers and US military medical personnel
worked within the existing national healthcare delivery infrastructure. This demanded a cultural sensitivity to both the limitations of the host country resources and the US military medical efforts.
The sustained US military presence in Honduras
contrasts markedly with the use of civic action in
most other countries.
El Salvador: Military Medicine in Security
Assistance Training Programs
In the 4 years leading up to the first US military
humanitarian involvement in El Salvador, the country had been in a period of escalating violence and
casualties. Large-scale combat operations to seek
out and destroy insurgent units and their bases,
coupled with the rapid increase of Salvadoran
armed forces and the insurgents’ use of land mines,
resulted in extremely high casualty rates. By 1983,
the ESAF mortality rate was about 45% due to the
lack of trained medical aid men in field units who
could utilize emergency lifesaving procedures such
as airway support and the control of hemorrhage.
There was also a lack of dedicated field medical
evacuation assets such as helicopters and ground
ambulances. As a field expedient measure, both
dead and wounded were transported in open trucks
to receive advanced medical care. Simple first aid
measures (such as tourniquet application to stop
bleeding, the administration of intravenous solution to restore blood volume and prevent shock, and
intubation to achieve airway control) were not done
because of lack of training and supplies. Severely
injured soldiers, as well as others with lesser injuries, often died during transport. This high mortality rate, combined with underlying medical and
field sanitation problems, contributed to demoralization of the Salvadoran troops. The number of
medical facilities was also inadequate to provide
for combat casualty care for those wounded soldiers
who survived the transport. (The military hospital
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
793
in San Salvador, for example, had increased its military physician staff from two to eight in an attempt
to handle an occupancy rate that was 345% greater
than planned capacity.)
These dire military medical statistics prompted
President Reagan to send a US Army medical mobile training team (MTT) to El Salvador in 1983, although the US military presence was limited due
to security problems throughout the country. This
medical team deployment was funded through the
Security Assistance Training Program under the
Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program. 42 This program provides for International Military Education
and Training (IMET) and is managed by the security assistance officer of the host country. Both the
cost of equipment and personnel are covered by
these funds. Countries receiving IMET funds are
determined by the congress, the president, and the
Department of State. Reimbursement for the military training provided is made from foreign assistance appropriations. The Salvadoran government
had requested that a portion of their Security Assistance funds be used for the development of this
training program.
The overall goal of the US Army MTT was to
improve the survival chances of the wounded Salvadoran soldier (a) on the battlefield (by improving the knowledge and skills of the combat medic
as well as the overall field sanitary environment),
(b) through the transport process (by improving the
speed of the transport), and (c) to the major medical facility for surgical care (by improving the surgical capabilities and skills of the medical staff). The
majority of these wounded soldiers had been injured by land mines.
Once they arrived in El Salvador, the US Army
medical training team worked to establish a trauma
surgery system, emphasizing simple life saving support care through the training of combat medics in
battlefield resuscitation as well as field sanitation.
The system also involved training individuals for
the rapid evacuation of the wounded by helicopter. Another important goal was to create a more
responsive surgical capability for battle casualties.
Training included a combination of both formal
course instruction and informal technical and management guidance.
An essential component of the program was to
teach basic battlefield first aid to individual soldiers
and to train and equip combat medics. These combat medics would now provide the first life-sustaining measures for the wounded. (This intensive training of El Salvadoran medics in these areas was not
available through the resources of their own country.) Other critical medical priorities were to train
nursing and biomedical equipment maintenance
personnel and to develop a responsive medical logistics system. An important preventive medicine
mission included the requirement to upgrade field
and garrison sanitation and individual hygiene. An
active program to train medical service personnel
in logistic supply was also instituted.
In addition to the equipment and training provided, a small combat support hospital (Figure 246) was constructed at San Miguel,33 in the eastern
region—an area of high guerilla activity. Important
medical stabilization measures instituted by an experienced surgeon increased the survival of patients
being transported to the main military hospital at
San Salvador. In summary, the accomplishments of
the training mission can be measured as follows (for
the 18-month period from June 1983–December
1984) for the members of the MTT:
Fig. 24-6. These Salvadoran soldiers are recuperating in
a combat support hospital. Most would have died of injuries before the training program of Salvadoran medics
by a US military medical training team. Evacuation procedures and early treatment of traumatic injuries were
taught and were provided in Salvadoran field hospitals
in close proximity to combat regions. Photograph: Courtesy of Russ Zajtchuk, MD. Reproduced with permission
from Military Medicine: International Journal of AMSUS.
1989;154(2):60.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
794
• trained 1,011 combat medics, 19 senior
medical noncommissioned officers, 39
medical evacuation aid men, 32 dental technicians, 88 intensive care nurses, and 8 biomedical equipment repair technicians;
• improved the medical supply system;
• assisted in organizing a field medical battalion;
• participated in structuring a unified medical system; and
• created a 72-man Medical Service Corps.
As a result of these efforts, the mortality rate of
wounded soldiers decreased from 45% to 5%. 33
Combat medics achieved similar evacuation results
as those of US medical personnel in Vietnam. The
training of the combat medic to perform life-saving care in the field was responsible for this significant reduction in mortality.
In 1985, the Chief of Staff of ESAF approved a
small medical civic action program to be done in
conjunction with tactical operations. This program
provided resources for immunization, primary
healthcare, and dentistry, and was similar to the
SOUTHCOM model used in Honduras. The USAID
also agreed to fund additional civic action programs
but only under the supervision of the Ministry of
Health or regional civilian healthcare programs.
These civilian programs took place only in secure
regions close to urban areas. Military forces were
invited to participate in these exercises. One important civic action project under ESAF was a campaign
to reduce the number of people injured by land mines.
This public service campaign, showing pictures of
the types of land mines, their explosive range, and
the type of injuries they inflicted, was distributed
to educate the rural population on this danger. 43
Follow-on care for victims of land mines was also
part of the overall mission of the medical training
team. One of the outstanding projects was the rehabilitation program for amputees. 44 The insurgent’s use
of land mines had caused an increased incidence of
injury necessitating amputations in both the military
and civilian populations. The mines were commonly
placed in coffee plantation fields, rural footpaths, and
village trails. Statistics were difficult to obtain. The
system for reporting information from the rural areas
was poor because the ESAF Medical Service did not
keep records of land mine injuries until 1984. However, it was estimated that extremity injuries caused
by land mines each month numbered approximately
55 in soldiers and 20 in civilians. A Professional Rehabilitation Center of the ESAF, staffed with occupational and physical therapists, was inaugurated in
1985 to provide for the rehabilitation of physically
handicapped soldiers (Figure 24-7). Many of the Salvadoran military veterans trained by the center to
manufacture and fit prostheses were themselves amputees. With the help of these veteran workers, victims now replaced makeshift hand-tooled devices
with professionally made prosthetics (Figure 24-8).
Despite the efforts of this center and its staff, by 1987
the number of amputees numbered about 1,500 with
only a quarter of them fitted with prostheses. Furthermore, children and adolescents accounted for a quarter to a third of these amputees. 34 In response to this
obvious need, USAID made a $500,000 grant in 1987
to subsidize a nonprofit organization to provide artificial limbs for civilian amputees. 45,46
The ESAF programs in preventive medicine and
field sanitation initially were not as successful as
the trauma care program. Constant attention to education and enforcement of standards was required
for success. Often problems thought to be corrected
resurfaced later because providing for basic health
needs did not receive the necessary priority by line
officers and medical personnel. As a result, special
programs were designed to teach line officers the
importance of preventive measures such as immunizations, malaria prophylaxis, and garrison sanitation. By 1986, all troops received a basic series of
vaccinations to include rabies if stationed in an endemic area. Malaria prophylaxis decreased the inFig. 24-7. Former Salvadoran soldiers previously injured
by mines are shown in a rehabilitation center that was
developed using the Security Assistance Program that
allowed training of foreign nationals. Several amputees
became members of special soccer teams. Photograph:
Courtesy of Russ Zajtchuk, MD. Reproduced with permission from Military Medicine: International Journal of
AMSUS. 1989;154(2):60.
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
795
cidence of this disease in units observing this regimen, contributing to greater unit readiness.
Another important aspect of the medical exchange
project was the foreign military observership program. 42 El Salvadoran medical personnel were able
to secure a 6-month rotation with a clinical or laboratory service at US Army hospitals. This was
strictly a government-to-government exchange with
funding provided by the IMET program using Security Assistance Program funds. These personnel
were given the opportunity to observe at a US medical facility in a specific medical discipline if they
met qualifying standards. For example, a plastic
surgeon would benefit from a rotation at the US
Army Burn Unit, Brooke Army Medical Center, San
Antonio, Texas, whereas an infectious disease doctor would benefit by rotations with their medical
counterparts at other military hospitals. The personal and professional benefits obtained for both
the individual physicians and their countries were
rewarding and served to further develop mutual
respect and understanding.
The US Army Medical Department also derived
benefits from the experiences gained by rotating US
military medical personnel in El Salvador. Individual physician specialists were requested by the
host country and rotated for 45 to 90 days at the
large military hospital at the capital, San Salvador.
Since the end of the war in Vietnam, active duty US
medical personnel have rarely had the opportunity
to work with US war casualties. During their rotations to Central America medical personnel had
experience with war trauma patients and also had
the opportunity to work with and train their Salvadoran medical colleagues in US surgical practices.
This experience was valuable in improving readiness skills in combat surgery and pre- and postoperative care, skills rarely practiced in the peacetime
US Army. This integrated medical assistance program in El Salvador was of benefit to both the
people and government of El Salvador. In particular, the Salvadoran government, in accepting the
integrated Security Assistance Program, improved
their military healthcare system within a short period of time. The Department of State and the Department of Defense, in concert with support from
the US Congress, was largely responsible for the
success of this program. The acceptance and expansion of the program is demonstrated by the fact that
from 1983 to 1987, program expenditures increased
from $350,000 to $14. 2 million. 33
In review, the role and value of medicine in several programs in El Salvador has been shown. The
form requiring the least coordination was the ESAF
medical civic action projects done in conjunction
with their military exercises in rural areas. This most
uniformly conformed to the intentions of the first
documented civic action programs as described by
Magsaysay in the Philippines. The goals and purposes of these original programs, in providing rudimentary healthcare to rural populations, was to
improve the interactions of the military with rural
populations while performing humanitarian assistance activities.
By far the most remarkable benefit of the medical
programs was in developing a de novo infrastructure
for military healthcare that was used by military and
civilian alike. The advances in trauma surgery and
care, as well as preventive medicine improvements
for the soldier, saved both civilian and military lives.
Project Coordination and Accountability
These US Department of Defense humanitarian
missions in Central American come under the purview of the CINC, SOUTHCOM, whose responsiFig. 24-8. Former Salvadoran soldiers, who had sustained
combat injuries, were trained to manufacture prostheses
for patients sustaining land mine injuries. American and
Salvadoran teams jointly developed this facility. Photograph: Courtesy of Russ Zajtchuk, MD. Reproduced with
permission from Military Medicine: International Journal
of AMSUS. 1989;154(2):60.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
796
bilities include early coordination of proposed H/
CA projects with the US Embassy country team, as
well as the country USAID officer. The Bureau of
Politico-Military Affairs of the Department of State
and the Bureau for Program and Policy Coordination in USAID review, comment, and act as the final approving authority before submission to the
CINC, SOUTHCOM. Once a project has been completed, all approved project after-action reports of
these various agencies are again coordinated. From
this process a final report is generated and submitted to the US Congress by each March 1st for the
previous fiscal year. The report includes: (a) a list
of countries in which humanitarian and civic assistance activities were carried out; (b) the type and
description of such activities carried out in each
country; and (c) the amount spent carrying out each
activity in each country. 47 Despite this structure and
project accounting, the medical humanitarian role
within the Department of Defense Civic Action Programs remains a controversial issue for the reasons
discussed in the introduction to this chapter. I
would hope that in the future this controversy could
be replaced with a more realistic assessment of the
place of these program in the overall doctrine and
mission of US foreign policy.
THE IMPACT OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE IN CENTRAL AMERICA
The Benefits of Humanitarian Assistance for
Host Countries
By the time I left Honduras in September 1985, the
DoD humanitarian assistance programs were well
established. In the years since then they have continued much as they were in terms of the goals and program structure, although they have increased in size
somewhat. The following comments regarding the
benefits of these programs for both the United States
and the host countries are based on my own observations, but are no doubt as true today as they were then.
The US medical training exercises in Honduras in
the form of rural medical missions and the deployment for training exercises are positive examples
of the use of medicine to assist host countries when
the United States has a continued military presence.
The interactions have been extremely beneficial to
the civilian community. For example, the country
vaccination program (Figure 24-9) in Honduras has
been a remarkable success story. With the US Army
air logistic support, the joint medical training exercises were combined with the country vaccination
program between 1983 and 1992, administering
800,000 doses each of DPT (diphtheria, pertussis,
tetanus), polio, measles, and BCG (Bacillus of
Calmette and Guerin, ie, tuberculosis) vaccines. 48
A report indicated that over 91% of all children
under the age of one had been given these vaccinations. 49 The outcome was better than in some regions of the United States in the same time frame. 49
In the training exercises, lectures are given in sanitation, primary healthcare, and nutrition. Educational charts from the Ministry of Health are left
with the teacher as a repetitive teaching aid. This is
the first step to improving rural health levels. The
Ministry of Health is given the disease survey from
the villages in order to plan for medical resources
and providing care. Honduran healthcare providers, previously unable to reach this rural population, can appreciate better the rural healthcare needs
of their nation (Figure 24-10).
US medicine influenced both military and public healthcare and in working collaboratively, provided the foundation to support specific Ministry
of Health policies. The original unintended consequences of medical assistance associated with military deployments, and the gradual incorporation
of a recognized role of humanitarian assistance in
military deployments, as implemented in Honduras, seems to approximate the goals and intentions
of the original concepts of nation building.
Fig. 24-9. A US military physician initiates a general
medical examination of school children before receiving
routine childhood immunizations. Photograph: Courtesy
of Joan Zajtchuk, MD, from the combined collection of
photographs taken by members of Joint Task Force Bravo,
Honduras (1983–1985).
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
797
Some Problems Associated With Humanitarian
Assistance
Despite the good intentions association with
these humanitarian assistance missions, there have
been problems. Some derive from the concept itself, some from the implementation of the concept
by US forces, some from the failure to coordinate
with the host country, and finally some from the
mischaracterization of the exercises as civic action.
These will be discussed each in turn.
Misunderstanding the Concept of Humanitarian
Assistance
The humanitarian assistance label was applied
to the medical readiness training exercises (MEDRETES). Medical Element work in hospitals and
rural medical training missions both provide
healthcare to the local population. By law, expendable medical supplies from US facilities can be used
in these joint missions. Unfortunately, the characterization of “expendable” supplies can contribute
to a “hand out” mentality on the part of the US
medical personnel involved in these programs. By
seeing these supplies as not needed by US forces, it
is easy for medical personnel to see the recipients
of these supplies as “needy,” and therefore they may
be viewed in a less than positive way. Furthermore,
such a misunderstanding of the concept of humanitarian assistance not only lessens the value of the
recipient as a person but it tends to induce the
“giver” to ignore the long-term benefits of these
programs for supporting US government policy and
that of the host countries. 37
Inadequately Implementing “Humanitarian
Assistance”
When the humanitarian assistance label is affixed
to the medical readiness training exercises it tends
to associate US efforts with superficial and uncoordinated care. Civic action missions satisfy only a
short-term goal, especially if not planned and coordinated within the healthcare system of the country. For
instance, early criticism by members of the Peace
Corps addressed a lack of sensitivity in dealing with
the local civilian populations. 50 This criticism was
also directed to the temporary nature of the treatment
provided to the sick (deworming, antibiotic treatment, dermatologic care). There is some truth to this
statement but the outreach program is just the beginning of future work that must be done by the
country’s healthcare system. Furthermore, this future
work must be coordinated with all the aspects of a
country’s healthcare infrastructure. For example, in
Honduras, just as in the United States, many areas
are so remote that their populations cannot get to
medical care. Other groups live closer in but are in
impoverished urban settings where healthcare professionals do not usually establish facilities. Additionally, in Honduras an overproduction of physicians
each year was flooding the market. An interesting
solution to these problems was to use the excessive
physician capacity to meet the accessibility issues
of the underserved population. Thus, after the required year of social service work in a regional hospital or clinic, there was mandatory service to the
public hospitals in the mornings with private practice permitted in the afternoon. The increasing awareness of Honduran healthcare workers of the poor
healthcare status in the rural areas and overpopulated urban areas serves to sensitize their thinking
and facilitate reforms in national healthcare.
Fig. 24-10. Honduran villagers wait in a schoolyard for
immunizations by humanitarian assistance team consisting of US military and Honduran military and civilian
medical personnel from the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Health provided the vaccines. Lectures were given
in basic hygiene using Ministry of Health teaching charts.
These charts were given to the village schoolteacher.
Photograph: Courtesy of Joan Zajtchuk, MD, from the
combined collection of photographs taken by members
of Joint Task Force Bravo, Honduras (1983–1985).
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
798
Limited Coordination With Other Caregivers
An example of counterproductive efforts due to
limited coordination with other caregivers was that
of the US Army Special Forces in medical training
exercises in Honduras in the mid-1980s. Their
stand-alone exercises were planned with a short
lead-time and were not coordinated with the plans
of the US Army medical element, the Honduran Ministry of Health, or the Honduran Army. Last minute
requests to support a Special Forces mission was
often at the expense of the long-term program51 and
after a while these requests were disapproved. The
Honduran military and civilian health authorities
came to view the Special Forces as this “other” Army.
Criticism by the medical element staff also involved
how long it took the Special Forces to replace medical materiel that they had “borrowed.” The medical element commander and command surgeon had
no jurisdiction over the quality of healthcare provided by the Special Forces and therefore could not
integrate their role into the long-range program. The
Special Forces, by using their medics in the role of
independent healthcare professionals, placed the
Honduran doctors in a less favorable light, as well
as influencing the Honduran perception of the overall medical mission of the US Army. With coordination, planning, and sensitivity to the overall picture,
these problems could have been minimized, and the
contribution of the Special Forces medics could have
been maximized. Just because an effort is a training mission does not mean that it cannot be coordinated with other agencies.
Misidentifying a Training Exercise as a “Civic
Action” Project
The designation of the training exercises with the
misnomer “civic action” creates a limited definition
to the exercise that falls short of US goals. As a result, DoD humanitarian assistance task force members, military group commanders, and others may
expect unrealistic requirements to be satisfied by
these exercises. Because of the small size and organization of the Honduran Army Medical Department, it was impossible for them to ideally support
the large number of training exercises. According
to Colonel R. Zajtchuk, the commander of the 41st
Support Hospital, the US Joint Task Force Commander (Honduras) implied in 1984 that these exercises were failing because of the infrequent and
inadequate support of the Honduran Army. 36
The task force commander also believed that support of these activities should consist of one-third
Honduran military, one-third Honduran civilian, and
one-third US military personnel. However, the original concept of military civic action developed in the
1960s predicated military involvement only if it did
not detract from a readiness mission. In this case due
to the small size of the Honduran armed forces it was
virtually impossible to support all US medical element
missions as well as satisfy its own medical needs.
Nonetheless, this same criticism was voiced by the
Assistant for Civil Military Operations at Special Operations Command regarding Honduran Army participation with the medical and engineer training exercises. 51 Should the number of medical missions be
decreased because of this impossible standard regarding degree of host country participation? It is my opinion that the answer to this question must be “no.” The
important issue is that the criteria of training are met
by US involvement. Any other limiting criteria that
are imposed by the United States to meet a hypothetical definition of civic action is counterproductive to
the US training mission and the US long-term contributions to the Honduran health system.
Despite the problems and limitations associated
with these medical missions, it remains in the best
interest of the United States to continue these missions. As long as the missions provide realistic training for military medical professionals and are of
benefit to the host nation, they will continue to help
stabilize and further relationships between the
United States and its allies.
THE PRESENT AND FUTURE OF NATION BUILDING (2001)
In recent years, intergovernmental agencies such
as the United Nations have often requested military
humanitarian assistance for member nations. Examples of these situations include the civil conflicts
in Somalia (Exhibit 24-7) and the Balkans, where
the affected populations required large-scale logistical operations beyond the capabilities of nongovernmental relief organizations (NGOs). The military
forces sent in for these missions must establish a
secure base of operations as the first public health
priority in areas experiencing armed conflict.
Among these military forces, the DoD has exceptional capabilities to conduct these missions. In
addition to its security and logistical capabilities, it
has strong operational and research capabilities in
the field of preventive medicine. Many of these capabilities were developed for use in austere field
conditions that closely mirror the situations likely
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
799
mary purpose of H/CA projects must be directed
to the humanitarian benefit of foreign nationals and
must address basic humanitarian needs. The benefit to the DoD is through its interactions with the
host nations and through opportunities to increase
host-nation capabilities in humanitarian responses.
Assistance under this program may not be provided
directly or indirectly to any individual, group, or
organization engaged in military or paramilitary
activity.
H/CA projects include those that fall in the general categories provided by law: (a) the provision of
medical, dental, and veterinary care in rural areas; (b)
construction of rudimentary surface transport systems; (c) drilling of wells; (d) construction of basic sanitation facilities; and (e) rudimentary construction and
repair of public facilities. Annual projects are identified by the US Embassy Country Teams who then
submit their requests to their regional CINCs. The
CINCs’ plans are then submitted to the Office of the
Secretary of Defense (OSD) for interagency review
and coordination and implementation at the local
level. The OSD submits a budget request for these programs as part of the president’s annual budget, as well
as providing annual policy and program guidance to
the regional commanders.
These programs are executed on an annual basis
and have congressional oversight through the allocation of specific funding to the various military
services to support the incremental costs for mateto be found in disasters or civil conflicts.
To date, more than 100 countries worldwide have
benefited from DoD humanitarian or civic assistance and from foreign disaster relief programs that
are operationally administered by the Office of the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Global
Affairs. Numerous DoD components including the
Joint Staff, the Air Mobility Command, and the regional commanders continue to be instrumental in
shaping the character and delivery of humanitarian assistance programs. Since 1986, the DoD has
held the charter for all major humanitarian assistance programs conducted by the United States.
Most of these authorizations for humanitarian assistance have subsequently been codified (Title 10,
United States Code). As a result, the success, efficiency, and appropriateness of uniformed-service
relief operations often depend on how knowledgeable their medical personnel are in understanding
the legislative limitations of delegated authorities
to implement these programs.
At present the Department of Defense Humanitarian Civic Assistance (H/CA) programs continue
to provide a means to shape the security environment and prepare for and respond to humanitarian
crises. Since 1996, the DoD has been authorized to
fund a wider variety of H/CA activities, including
the use of contractors and the deployment of US
military personnel to conduct specific humanitarian projects. This authorization stated that the priEXHIBIT 24-7
GROUND TROOPS IN SOMALIA
Since the end of the Cold War, uniformed service personnel have been assigned to many international relief
organizations, including the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Relief
Fund (UNICEF). The relationship between uniformed service personnel and international relief organizations
and agencies was particularly useful during the humanitarian assistance in Somalia where UNICEF coordinated and often provided a central clearinghouse for relief agency activities. Uniformed service medical officers served as consultants to UNICEF during this operation and provided important technical assistance.
A more recent project, the 1994 use of ground troops in Somalia, is an example of how the Department of
Defense’ humanitarian assistance role in developing countries is a consideration in using US ground troops.
The goal, short term in nature, was to secure an immediate base of operations so that relief organizations
could become effective in food distribution and the provision of medical care. The population of Somalia had
been devastated by disease and starvation because the ongoing civil war between rival clan leaders had prevented international relief agencies from meeting even the minimal public health needs of the populace. “Operation Restore Hope” implemented a policy that included (a) respect for the customs of the country and
avoidance of any activity that might undermine local elders or clan leaders; (b) support of the existing healthcare
structure in providing only necessary interventions that did not compete with or make obsolete the standards
of local care; and (c) design of a system that remained supporting the local governmental bodies after the
departure of the military forces. The intended goal, however, was never reached because of the inability to
provide a secure base of operations within rival clan territories.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
800
rials for the H/CA program. Currently, all military
branches are active in DoD humanitarian assistance
and disaster relief operations around the world. The
Army allocates funding to the European Command
(EUCOM) and the Southern Command (SOUTHCOM); the Navy funds the Pacific Command
(PACOM), and the Air Force funds the Central Command (CENCOM). The Army is more heavily involved because of the greater numbers of deployments. National Guard and Reserve Units continue
to play a prominent role in this effort, especially in
SOUTHCOM.
For these uniformed-service humanitarian assistance operations to be successful from a public
health perspective, the programs must become well
integrated within the national infrastructure. One
effective method for realizing such a goal involves
the coordination of the services of the USAID with
its subunits, the Bureau of Food and Humanitarian
Assistance and the Office of US Foreign Disaster
Assistance. The capabilities of USAID rank as one
of the most significant, immediate, and long-term
disaster relief instruments of the US government.
Their services and programs, coordinated through
the local US embassy or USAID mission, makes
humanitarian assistance an important component
of the US government’s foreign policy.
Although most intergovernmental agencies and
NGOs do not have the logistical or field medical
capability of the military, they accomplish a great
deal by focusing solely on improving public health
conditions. Their public health role is seen as more
acceptable than that of the DoD in performing a limited number of specialized activities (eg, delivering medical services, managing food distribution
programs, or conducting an orderly migration or
repatriation) and they have unique responsibilities
and capabilities that are accepted by international
organizations. The ability of the military to coordinate its roles with NGOs and the host country agencies will synergistically intensify the timeliness of
the relief effort. Just as the military has standards
of performance, NGOs have charters and guidelines
to achieve expected results that are established by
their governing boards. Commanders and uniformedservice medical personnel need to understand their
roles in order to judge how best to complement the
efforts of these organizations. In addition, uniformed-service personnel must be willing to coordinate their activities with NGOs and United Nations agencies because the military, at the time of
their withdrawal, must transfer the relief-effort responsibilities to these organizations or to their hostcountry counterparts.
Any goal to expand the role of military medicine
must include: (a) an examination of the moral and
humanitarian principles; (b) an awareness of the
value placed on the resultant good will; (c) knowledge of the former role that counterinsurgency strategy played; and (d) the reasons why humanitarian
assistance efforts have failed in the past. As the
planning for military participation continues, emphasis should be directed to the programming of
sufficient funds to continue these projects. In addition, emphasis should be placed on providing closer
alignments of health services efforts between DoD,
other governmental agencies and NGOs, and ultimately to the host-country infrastructure.
CONCLUSION
The Vietnam experience demonstrated that to
conduct successful humanitarian civic action programs it is necessary to select and educate highly
skilled behavioral personnel who are culturally
enlightened and linguistically proficient. These individuals must possess the potential to remove
themselves from traditional American cultural constraints and be able to perceive problems and their
attendant solutions through the eyes of a foreign
culture. They must have the training and intellectual breadth to understand the political, economic,
social, and military institutions of the foreign nation, how they interact in meeting the needs of the
people, and how to complement host nation programs. The ability of US personnel to understand
the military and civilian structure and thought processes of the host-nation country is especially critical, in that the implementation of military civic action to their host-nation counterparts will be accomplished using these tools.
The Vietnam experience also demonstrated that
during high-intensity conflict it may not be possible
to institute effective humanitarian/civic action programs. These assistance programs will accomplish
the most good in peaceful areas around the world
or where the conflict is at low-intensity level. For a
long-term nation building effort to be successful,
the host nation must initiate the request and expect
to share in the real costs of a successful program.
Furthermore, care should be taken to assure that
the US advisory role is progressively withdrawn as
host government infrastructure programs reach the
sustaining state.
American medicine is respected worldwide, and
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
801
the American ability to respond with aid in the event
of natural or man-made disaster is beyond that of
any nation. Although aid should not be administered
indiscriminately, and there should be no attempt to
do so, American ability to provide swift, effective
humanitarian aid is one way in which this country
can demonstrate that it is truly aware of the concerns
of other nations. In particular, the United States
should put its military medical structures—expressly
designed for projecting US prowess anywhere in the
world—at the disposal of nations considered to be
in American strategic interests to support. The US
military should operate as “high-technology” consultants, and if “hands-on” help is required, the response
should be with deployments of limited duration,
with the objective of ameliorating host-nation needs
in a short-term crisis, and promoting the development of local capabilities to deal effectively with
the situation after US forces depart.
The new and emerging role of military medicine
assumes a new proactive and preclusive stance,
entering potential preselected target population
areas in conjunction with engineer, signal, civil affairs, and psychological operations before the tactical situation deteriorates to the point that open
conflict commences and casualties begin to be generated. Strategies to begin to address the existing
medical infrastructure of friendly nations include
the use of mobile training teams paid for by foreign military sales, joint and international exercises
conducted by US and friendly forces, emergency
deployment readiness exercises conducted by US
forces for limited periods of time as training exercises, and a reliance on technology to reduce peopleintensive functions to a minimum.
Effective medical planning is critical in order to
provide the task force commander with recommendations and programs necessary for success. It is
essential that the responsibility for all medical planning rest with the task force surgeon and that efforts to provide military medical services to host
country nationals by all others be coordinated
through them. Strict coordination requirements preclude potentially counterproductive, ad hoc medical activity from taking place. A negative outcome
of such activity may occur when the host country’s
expectations are raised by uncoordinated US medical civic action programs. When US forces depart,
the host-nation government may be unable to meet
the higher expectations of its citizens. Proper coordination of all medical activity includes existing
host-nation military and civilian medical personnel
and should provide an opportunity for follow-up
exercises at the same sites and program evaluation.
The inclusion of host-nation healthcare professionals increases their capability to render future medical
care themselves as well as provide the host nation
with an opportunity to receive credit for providing
healthcare services to its population. Additionally,
uniformed service personnel must also coordinate
their primary care medical activities with UN sponsored or nongovernmental agencies as much as
possible. These relief agencies, in their recurring
presence, will provide the long-term assistance.
There is a concern expressed by private and voluntary organizations in the United States regarding the DoD providing humanitarian assistance.
These organizations point out that under the
Geneva Conventions, which have come to provide
the established international understanding of humanitarian assistance, only civilians, and not military medical personnel, have the right to provide
this aid. They further note that providing humanitarian assistance for other military forces contradicts
the purpose underlying this assistance. According
to the Geneva Conventions, organizations are required to meet certain criteria in order to administer humanitarian assistance. The criteria stipulate
that the aid is provided strictly on the basis of need
and that the organizations provide guarantees of
efficacy based on proven experience, independence
from parties to the conflict, and are a recognized
authority in the international community. These
conditions would appear to preclude DoD from
participation in the provision of humanitarian aid.
It further appears that international custom and
convention dictate that aid be provided to recipients in need and not to assist in accomplishing political objectives. It is inconsistent with the nature
of humanitarian assistance, they argue, to condition
its provision on achieving a cease-fire or on bringing warring parties to the negotiating table. I disagree with their argument. There are many instances in which only a military force can lay the
groundwork for a long-term humanitarian effort,
or in which only a military force can prevent the
very circumstances that would, left unchecked, result in a full-blown humanitarian disaster. The results of civil conflicts in Somalia and the Balkans
demonstrate that affected populations often require
large-scale logistical operations. These operations
may be of such a large scale and of such urgency
that the infrastructure of the country cannot meet
the demands. It is not prudent, nor is it humane, to
preclude the Department of Defense, or military
defense forces from other concerned nations under
the UN charter, from helping in these situations.
With careful coordination, military forces can be of
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
802
significant assistance to suffering populations
around the world while at the same time maintaining their mission skills and readiness posture.
As the world becomes more of a global community due to the rapid increases in technology, especially communications technology, the pace and
extent of humanitarian operations will increase. The
United States and other nations are now increasingly deploying their military forces to worldwide
regional conflicts. These nations appear to be becoming more cooperative in their efforts to solve
these foreign conflicts at a global problem-solving
level. In the US government’s commitment to support and enhance the humanitarian assistance role
of military medicine in the face of increased global
needs, the United States reinforces its historical
values of assisting in foreign disaster relief efforts
that has been without precedence over the last century. At the same time, having taken the lead in providing disaster relief efforts, it is important to look
at some of the unintended consequences of these
efforts. This is the subject of the next chapter.
REFERENCES
1.
Brandt DA. Physicians for human rights and the Kurdish refugee crisis. JAMA. 1994;271:745–746.
2.
Byrd T. Disaster medicine: Towards a more rational approach. Mil Med. 1980;145:270–273.
3.
Toole MJ. Military role in humanitarian relief in Somalia. Lancet. 1993;342:190–191.
4.
Bina WF. US hospital ships: More public health, less high tech. JAMA. 1993;270:2927–2928.
5.
Nunn S. Roles, missions under scrutiny. Officer. 1993;69:20–24.
6.
Huntington S. New contingencies, old roles. Joint Force Q. 1993;2:38–43.
7.
US Department of the Navy. From the Sea, Preparing the Naval Service for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: US
GPO; 1991: 5.
8.
National Security Council. National Security Strategy of the United States. Washington, DC: US GPO;1993: 14.
9.
Dunlap CJ. The origins of the American military coup of 2012. Parameters. [US Army War College Q] 1992–
1993;2:20–35.
10.
Guiding principles on the right to humanitarian assistance. Presented at: Conference of International Institute
of Humanitarian Law; September 1992; San Remo, Italy.
11.
Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief
Steering Committee for Humanitarian Response, Geneva, 1993.
12.
Foster GM. Postwar relief and America’s sense of humanitarian mission. Subchap in: Disease in the aftermath
of war: Disaster aid to Poland and Russia after World War I. In: Trask DF, ed. The Demands of Humanity: Army
Medical Disaster Relief. Washington, DC: US Department of the Army, Center of Military History; 1982: 81–83.
13.
Foster GM. Typhus in Poland. Subchap in: Disease in the aftermath of war: Disaster aid to Poland and Russia
after World War I. In: Trask DF, ed. The Demands of Humanity: Army Medical Disaster Relief. Washington, DC: US
Department of the Army, Center of Military History; 1982: 83–94.
14.
Foster GM. Famine in Russia. Subchap in: Disease in the aftermath of war: Disaster aid to Poland and Russia
after World War I. In: Trask DF, ed. The Demands of Humanity: Army Medical Disaster Relief. Washington, DC: US
Department of the Army, Center of Military History; 1982: 94–98.
15.
Foster GM. Confusion over the Army’s disaster relief role, reevaluation and relief in the thirties, and toward
new relief roles. Subchaps in: Relief role in transition assistance at home and abroad, 1918–1939. In: Trask DF,
ed. The Demands of Humanity: Army Medical Disaster Relief. Washington, DC: US Department of the Army, Center of Military History; 1982: 99–126.
Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions
803
16.
Foster GM. The Texas City explosion, creation of a federal relief bureaucracy, medical relief missions of the
fifties and sixties, and federal reorganization and minor medical missions of the seventies. Subchaps in: Domestic assistance under civilian coordination, 1945–1976. In: Trask DF, ed. The Demands of Humanity: Army
Medical Disaster Relief. Washington, DC: US Department of the Army, Center of Military History; 1982: 127–145.
17.
Blaufarb DS. Communist rural insurgency. In: The Counterinsurgency Era: US Doctrine and Performance, 1950 to
the Present. New York: Free Press; 1977: 1–21.
18.
United States Congress. Senate Committee on Foreign Aid. The President’s Committee to Study the United States
Military Assistance Program. Washington, DC: GPO; 17 August 1959.
19.
United States Congress. Senate Committee on Foreign Aid. The President’s Committee to Study the United States
Military Assistance Program. Final Report. Washington, DC: US GPO; 17 August 1959.
20.
Glick BE. America’s civic action program. Subchap in: Peaceful Conflict: The Non-Military Use of the Military.
Harrisburg, Pa: Stackpole Books; 1967: 67–99.
21.
Blaufarb DS. The Kennedy crucible. In: The Counterinsurgency Era: US Doctrine and Performance, 1950 to the
Present. New York: Free Press; 1977: 52–88.
22.
Krepinevich AF. The Army and Vietnam. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1986: 17–36.
23.
Blaufarb DS. The revival of counterinsurgency: Vietnam, 1963–1967. In: The Counterinsurgency Era: US Doctrine
and Performance, 1950 to the Present. New York: Free Press; 1977: 205–242.
24.
Foster GM. Activism abroad: Foreign disaster relief, 1945–1976. In: Trask DF, ed. The Demands of Humanity:
Army Medical Disaster Relief. Washington, DC: US Department of the Army, Center of Military History; 1982:
146–174.
25.
Nation Building Contributions of the Army. Washington, DC: Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations, 14
September 1968.
26.
Herrington SA. Silence Was a Weapon: The Vietnam War in the Villages. Novato, Calif: Presidio Press; 1982.
27.
McCollum JK. CORDS: Matrix for peace in Vietnam. Army Magazine. July 1982:51.
28.
Clark PG. American Aid for Development. New York: Praeger Publishers; 1972.
29.
Surgeon General’s Report on Lt. Gen. Leonard Heaton [former commander of Walter Reed from 1953 to 1959,
Army Surgeon General from 1959 to 1969]. Washington DC: Office of the Surgeon General.
30.
Doctrine was reviewed by author, Joan Zajtchuk, MD.
31.
Young EJ. El Salvador: Communist blueprint for insurgency in Central America. Conflict. 1985;5(4): 307–336.
32.
US Department of State. The Guerilla Movement in El Salvador. Washington, DC: US Department of State Pamphlet; July 1987.
33.
Zajtchuk R, Brown FW, Rumbaugh JH. Medical success in El Salvador. Mil Med. 1989;154:59–61.
34.
Elliot RF. US Army Humanitarian Medical Assistance in El Salvador [A report written by Colonel Robert F. Elliott,
MS, USA, Deputy Chief of First Medical Assistance Team to El Salvador]. January 1988; 6–8.
35.
Armed Service Committee May 1983 testimony as recounted in the author’s interview with General Gorman,
March 20, 1991.
36.
Author interview of [then] COL Russ Zajtchuk, Commander of 41st Combat Support Hospital (1983–1984) on
January 21, 1999, as well as recounted personal experience of interviewee.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
804
37.
Personal interview of Dr. Robert K. Wolthuis, Director, Office of Humanitarian Assistance, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Washington, DC 20301-2400, 9 January 1991.
38.
Personal experience of author, Joan Zajtchuk, MD.
39.
GAO Report to Congress on Military Medical Activities in Honduras, May 1984.
40.
Command Briefing: The DoD Humanitarian Assistance Program. Presented at the Third Annual Department
of Defense Humanitarian Assistance Conference, Office of Humanitarian Assistance, Office of the Secretary of
Defense, Washington, DC. 11–12 January 1989.
41.
Inter-American Defense Board. Work of the Armed Forces in the Economic and Social Development of the Countries
(Military Civic Action). 8 June 1965 [internal unclassified publication]. Available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific & Technical Information, Springfield, Va.
42.
Rumsey S. Army Medical Department (AMEDD) Participation in International Programs (Information Paper). Washington, DC: Office of the Army Surgeon, International Programs; 24 February 1989.
43.
El Salvadoran Army Pamphlet. Conoce Las Minas? Campana Civica de Prevencion Contra las Minas Terroristas.
Fuerza Armada de El Salvador.
44.
Information paper by Colonel Russ Zajtchuk, 8 January 1987, Chief of Consultant’s Division and Deputy to
Chief of Medical Corps at the Office of The Surgeon General on SUBJECT: Medical Mobile Training Team El
Salvador, 1983 to Present.
45.
Kenevan RJ, Thrill FA, Ortiz T, Rodriguez MA. Medical mobile training team 1983–1985 in El Salvador. Mil
Med. 1988;153:11–13.
46.
US Department of State. Publication 9554, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Office of Public Diplomacy for
Latin American and the Caribbean. Latin America Dispatch, July, 1987.
47.
Available at: http://www.ciponline.org/facts/hca.htm. Accessed 6 December 2001.
48.
Statistics provided to Army Surgeon General’s Office in 1992, compiled by R. Zajtchuk.
49.
Vaccination record in US falls sharply. Washington Post. 24 March 1991:A1, A22, A23. (Statistics compiled by the
Centers for Disease Control).
50.
Swenarski L. When the Peace Corps meets the Army in a distant land. Army. July 1987:16–20.
51.
Unclassified Memorandum for Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low Intensity Conflict. SUBJECT: Honduras Trip Report—ACTION MEMORANDUM, February 1990, Prepared by Lieutenant
Colonel Paul M. Mikesh, USAR, Assistant for Civil-Military Operations, Missions and Applications, Office of
the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Washington, DC 20301-2500.
