Nursing Ethics and the Military
661
Chapter 20
NURSING ETHICS AND THE MILITARY
JANET R. SOUTHBY, RN, DNSC*
INTRODUCTION
EARLY NURSING ETHICS
ETHICAL STANDARDS FOR NURSES
NURSING AND MEDICINE
ETHICAL DECISION MAKING
RESOLVING ETHICAL DILEMMAS
Clinical Interactions
Continuing Education
Nursing Research
Nursing Administration
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Nurse Corps, United States Army; formerly Chief, Department of Nursing, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, DC, and Chief Nurse, North Atlantic Regional Medical Command, Washington, DC; currently, Associate Director, Interagency Institute
for Federal Health Care Executives, School of Public Health and Health Services, The George Washington University Medical Center, Washington, DC
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
662
This untitled painting, signed “Ramus ’45,” suggests the adoration for the US Army Nurse so often expressed by the
wounded GIs whose lives they help to save.
Art: Courtesy of US Army Medical Department Museum, Fort Sam Houston, Texas.
Nursing Ethics and the Military
663
INTRODUCTION
part, are not different from those experienced by
their civilian counterparts working in trauma centers or prison health systems. What is unique is that
during wartime, a great number of stressful experiences often occur in a compressed period of time,
usually away from traditional, personal support
systems. Also, the situation of displaced persons,
refugees, and those who suffer collateral injuries
adds another dimension. Although all female professional nurses have been volunteers in the US
military services, the experience may not always
have turned out to be what was perceived or expected and the location may not have been one of
the individual’s choices. Some of the moral dilemmas that have been reported will be shared in this
chapter.
The development of military nursing throughout modern history has had intricate associations
with the private nursing sector and the status of
women in society. As the nursing profession has
evolved over time, so has the concept of nursing
ethics. Several leaders in the evolution of modern
civilian nursing also influenced military nursing as
their careers intersected with the Army during wartime. From the time of Nightingale and the Crimean
War to current, diverse healthcare settings from
hospitals to security and sustainment operations,
nurses in the military environment continue to
struggle with challenging ethical issues involving
their patients and the practice and profession of
nursing. This chapter will review the history of
early nursing ethics, trend the development of the
ethical code for nurses, explore how nursing and
medicine view ethical decision making, and discuss
the resolution of ethical dilemmas.
Although the care and comfort of the sick and
injured is a critical component of every war, military leaders and the public, in general, have traditionally given little attention to these healthcare
professionals. Most of the acknowledgment and
gratitude they have received was from those who
had the unfortunate occasion to experience the compassionate service provided by nurses during wartime. Almost every veteran injured in battle and
cared for by nurses far from home has his story to
tell. This was probably never more evident than on
Veterans’ Day, 1993, in Washington, DC, when the
Vietnam Women’s Memorial was dedicated. More
than 30,000 people turned out for the dedication of
the first visible symbol in the nation’s capital to
honor women’s patriotic service. Many attending
were veterans, those who had been cared for and
those who provided that care, each seeking the other
to share a special bond formed years ago in faraway
places.
Nurses have often been called the “forgotten veterans” because their role under the unique circumstances of war has not been well understood, even
though nursing is an occupation known to everyone. In hostile and unfamiliar surroundings and
separated from loved ones, the tradition of military
nurses has been to steadfastly continue their practice of caring for others. In this stressful environment, they witness and experience the extremes of
human behavior in others and in themselves.
Nurses do experience “war,” not necessarily in the
sense of a combatant, but rather the larger, moral
picture of war—its cost measured in its casualties. 1
The professional strains and moral dilemmas
experienced by today’s military nurses, for the most
EARLY NURSING ETHICS
During the Revolutionary War, camp followers
on both sides of the war were women who cooked,
cleaned, washed, and sewed. Those who tended the
sick and wounded were known as nurses, although
the extent of their previous experience may have
been tending to an ailing family member. After all,
the word nurse (nutricia or nourishing) means a
person who is skilled or trained in caring for the
sick or infirm.
In 1775, General Horatio Gates reported to General Washington that “the sick suffered much for
Want of good female Nurses.” In turn, General
Washington asked the Congress for “a matron to
supervise the nurses, bedding, etc,” and for nurses
“to attend the sick and obey the matron’s orders.”
The medical support plan provided one nurse for
every 10 patients and “that a matron be allotted to
every hundred sick or wounded, who shall take care
that the provisions are properly prepared; that the
wards, beds, and utensils be kept in neat order, and
that the most exact economy be observed in her
department.” In spite of these references to nursing, it was not recognized as a separate and distinct service. 2
Later, as Lady Superintendent in Chief of female
nurses in the English General Military Hospitals
during the Crimean War, Florence Nightingale promoted military nursing when she organized a group
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
664
of nurses for war service in Turkey in 1854. She
battled to improve sanitary conditions and acceptance of female nurses. She understood medical and
military politics and used statistical data, keen writing skills, and good social connections to achieve
her purposes. Many of the early ethical issues in
nursing arose from the image that nurses were
women of dubious reputation and nursing was a
task viewed as being neither as lowly as a simple
domestic, nor as highly placed as a cook. Overcoming this image of nursing was a great challenge to
Florence Nightingale when she started the Nightingale School of Nursing in 1860 at St. Thomas’s
Hospital, London.
During the same period in the United States,
Dorothea L. Dix, known for improvement in the care
of the mentally ill, had responded to President
Lincoln’s call for volunteers to help care for sick
and injured soldiers. Appointed Superintendent of
the Female Nurses of the Union Army in 1861, she
initially set strict criteria for her nurses but, due to
the great need, later appointed almost any woman
willing to serve. As the war continued, there was no
single system for recruiting and preparing nurses;
few had actual preparation beyond family experiences. The acceptance of female nurses near the
battlefield varied with the intensity of need. They
also tended to anger the hierarchy with their letter
writing. Having learned that letters were the lifeblood between the injured and their families, Civil
War nurses used this woman-to-woman communication link to arouse and maintain pressure for the
flow of needed supplies from private and charitable
sources when the supply system failed. They wrote
about unsafe conditions and, on occasion, unsafe
medical practice, taking sanitation and organization
into their own hands. The many women, known and
unknown, who organized relief agencies and served
as nurses changed forever the concept of women’s
roles. The Civil War is credited as setting the stage
for the emergence of women from home to larger
societal purpose, the development of professional
nursing in the United States, and the inclusion of
trained women nurses in military organizations. 3
During the remainder of the century, it was traditional for ethical issues in nursing to focus on etiquette
as the first formal schools of nursing attempted to
attract the respectable and educated daughters of
families from the middle classes. Morals and manners were emphasized as necessary characteristics
for a woman to possess or acquire to be a successful nurse. The extent to which ethical considerations
were pursued in the curricula is unclear. Yet, it is
noted that students of the Johns Hopkins School of
Nursing were taught ethical issues soon after the
opening of the school in 1889. 4
At the onset of the Spanish-American War, Dr.
Anita Newcomb McGee, Vice President of the National Society of the Daughters of the American
Revolution, was placed in charge of selecting graduate nurses for the Army. The Army Medical Department reluctantly called for the nursing services of
women when unable to enlist enough male medics
qualified by previous experience to perform important patient care duties and because of the epidemic
prevalence of typhoid fever in Army camps. The
record of service of the women nurses who served
in this war was a convincing factor in the establishment of a permanent nurse corps (as well as a memorial in Arlington Cemetery; see Figure 20-1). In
spite of some reluctance on the part of Surgeon
Fig. 20-1. The Nurses Memorial. This marble statue honoring military nurses is located on a knoll in Section 21
of Arlington National Cemetery where hundreds of
nurses are buried. The sculpture, by Frances Rich, was
originally dedicated on 8 November 1938 to commemorate Army and Navy nurses. It was rededicated on 20
November 1970 to include Air Force nurses as well as all
nurses who had served since 1938.
Nursing Ethics and the Military
665
General George M. Steinberg and some senior medical officers, the Nurse Corps (female) became a permanent corps of the Army Medical Department on
2 February 1901. 2
Following this, there was great interest in the
Medical Department of the Navy to formalize a
nurse corps. Nursing in the Navy was originally
carried out by members of the ship’s crew who were
untrained and held no special status until establishment of the Hospital Corps in 1898. The Nurse
Corps (female) of the US Navy, established by law
on 13 May 1908, met with some resistance among
military doctors. Navy nurses charted new territory,
however, and their first superintendent, Esther V.
Hasson, predicted in 1909:
One of the principle [sic] duties of the woman nurse
in the Navy will be the bedside instruction of the
hospital apprentices in the practical essentials of
nursing….When treatment, baths, or medication
come due it is not expected or desired that she will
always give these herself, but it will be her duty to
see that the apprentices carry out the orders promptly
and intelligently. This arrangement does not, however, absolve the nurse…from doing the actual
nursing work whenever necessary…she is always
expected to keep uppermost in her mind… the improvement of the apprentices to whom the bulk of
the nursing of the Navy afloat will always fall, for
it is not the intention of the Surgeon General to station women nurses on any but hospital ships. 5
In 1917, Annie W. Goodrich, president of the
American Nurses Association, was appointed under contract as Chief Inspector Nurse of the Army.
Her unfavorable report on utilizing nurses’ aides
in Army hospitals called for more trained nurses.
She subsequently became Dean of the first Army
School of Nursing, authorized in 1918 by the Secretary of War. Sometime in the 1920s, the second Dean
and first Superintendent of the Army Nurse Corps,
Major Julia C. Stimson, began to teach ethics.
Major Stimson’s notes reveal that she held the
ethics course as an open forum with the students,
assigning four problems each week for discussion.
One section of her notes listed 22 discussion points
ranging from simplistic to philosophical. Examples
included:
• To what extent is dress involved in the question of nursing ethics? Trace the historical
development of the uniform and the current observance in regard to the uniform in
public places, wearing jewelry, etc.
• Discuss the following questions from the
standpoint of nursing ethics. Smoking,
bobbed hair, use of cosmetics, drinking, rule
of seniority, class distinction, tipping, and
presents.
• What is the main contribution of nursing
ethics made by the following: Hippocrates,
St. Paul, Jerome, St. Francis, Elizabeth of
Hungary, Luther, Edith Cavell, Deaconesses, Monasteries, St. Vincent de Paul, John
Howard, The Fleidners, Charles Dickens,
Florence Nightingale, Dorothea Dix, Knights
Hospitallers, Secular Orders. 6
These topics were typical of ethical discussions at
the time. Major Stimson also included the definitions
of ethics and nursing ethics attributed to Isabel Hampton Robb. Mrs. Robb’s text, Nursing Ethics for Hospital
and Private Use, addressed posture, table manners, and
appropriate wardrobe for a nurse, but also covered
health, education, and culture as necessary qualifications for nursing. An outstanding nurse of the day,
she had been instrumental in initiating two national
nursing associations and an official journal for nurses.
Many considered her book to be a great step toward
professionalism in nursing. Nursing leaders acknowledged that, although women could be trained to be
nurses, character could not be changed. Character was
important for members of the emerging profession.
Nursing had begun to move from ethical issues of personal morality to professional ethics.
ETHICAL STANDARDS FOR NURSES
Meanwhile, the first generally accepted written
code for nursing in the United States had been formulated in 1893. A committee under the leadership
of Lystra E. Gretter, principal of the Forrand Training School for Nurses in Detroit, developed the
pledge to serve as guide for the ethical behavior of
nurses until a formal code of ethics was completed.
It was patterned after medicine’s Hippocratic Oath
and named after Florence Nightingale, whom
Gretter felt embodied the highest ideals of nursing.
The Nightingale Pledge, still frequently administered at many nursing school graduations today,
reads as follows:
I solemnly pledge myself before God and in the
presence of this assembly to pass my life in purity
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
666
and to practice my profession faithfully.
I will abstain from whatever is deleterious and
mischievous, and will not take or knowingly administer any harmful drug.
I will do all in my power to maintain and elevate
the standard of my profession, and will hold in
confidence all personal matters committed to my
keeping, and all family affairs coming to my knowledge in the practice of my profession.
With loyalty will I endeavor to aid the physician in
his work, and devote myself to the welfare of those
committed to my care. 7
The Nurses’ Associated Alumnae of the United
States and Canada, forerunner of the American
Nurses’ Association (ANA), sought to establish and
maintain a code of ethics for the purpose of promoting ethical standards in all the relations of the
nursing profession as early as 1896. Nurses wanted
something concrete they could use as a basis for
professional conduct and in teaching ethics. The
legacy of these early efforts is the “Code of Ethics
for Nurses With Interpretive Statements.”8–10
Since its inception, nursing’s code of ethics has
undergone periodic revisions in order to remain
relevant. Changes in the code were influenced by
the growth of nursing toward professionalism and
by changes in nursing, society, and healthcare. Yet,
the ethical norms of the profession, the moral duties, and the values of the profession have remained
constant. First, “A Suggested Code,” presented in
1926, reflected values of “Christian morality” and
attitudes toward nursing at that time. Nurses were
viewed as obedient, submissive to rules, adept in
social etiquette, and loyal to the physician. Nursing was considered to be an emerging profession
meeting a basic human need. Nursing and medicine were viewed as distinct but complementary
disciplines characterized by mutual respect. The
1926 code was replaced by “A Tentative Code” in
1940. The intent was to recognize nursing as a profession. It cited the responsibility of the nurse in
relationships to the patient, other nurses, the employer, the public and others, as well as responsibility to oneself. Guidance was provided for specific situations rather than a broad framework that
could be applied in a variety of situations. The concept of research as a means of improving care was
introduced for the first time.
Ten years passed before the code was altered
again. Undoubtedly the entry of the United States
into World War II contributed to the hiatus in further development. The country was faced with a
critical shortage of registered nurses nationwide. To
help meet nursing personnel requirements, the
United States Cadet Nurse Corps was established
under the administration of the United States Public Health Service. This measure set the precedent
that schools of nursing were recognized as essential agencies in the protection of the nation’s health.
During this period, the Army Nurse Corps began
specialty training in anesthesiology, operating room
procedures, and public health nursing. In 1942,
Navy nurses were given a status called “relative
rank,” which had been afforded to Army nurses in
1920. The Army-Navy Nurse Act of 1947 provided
permanent commissioned officer status for registered nurses in the armed services, and Public Law
36, 80th Congress, established the Army Nurse
Corps (ANC) in the Medical Department of the
Regular Army. On 1 July 1949, the US Air Force
Nurse Corps was established. A total of 1,999 Army
nurses transferred to the US Air Force, forming the
nucleus of its Nurse Corps. The status of commissioned officers assisted military nursing in its efforts to change outmoded ideas and pave the way
for the nursing profession. 2(p23),11
The revised “Code for Professional Nurses,”
unanimously accepted by the ANA in 1950, consisted of a brief preamble and 17 succinct, enumerated provisions. The word “professional” was used
to describe the nurse and the statement about loyalty to the physician was omitted. The prevention
of illness and promotion of health by teaching and
example were included as expectations of nursing.
Then, in 1953, the International Council of Nurses
(ICN) adopted an international code of ethics for
nurses to serve as the standard for nurses worldwide. The 14 statements cited the responsibility of
nurses to conserve life, alleviate suffering, and promote health. Nurses were expected to refuse to participate in unethical procedures, report unethical
conduct of associates but only to the proper authority, and to adhere to standards of personal ethics in
their professional and private lives. Although minor revisions were made at various times, a new
version was not released until 27 years later, responding to the realities of nursing and healthcare
in a changing society. 12
Further amendments to the ANA code, in 1956
and 1960, addressed nurse participation in advertising professional services and in setting terms and
conditions of employment. During this decade, attention shifted from concern for content of the code
to concern about its enforcement in the practice setting. It was also during this time that the armed
Nursing Ethics and the Military
667
services commissioned male registered nurses.Men,
as medics, were a tradition in military medicine. In
1951, the Department of Defense (DoD) established
a definitive policy (DoD Directive 750. 04-1, renumbered 1125. 1) on the utilization of registered nurses
in the military services and instructed the military
medical services to establish programs to train and
utilize enlisted personnel as practical nurses and
in other paraprofessional nursing roles providing
patient care. 2(pp25–28) The same year, Congresswoman
Frances P. Bolton introduced HR 911 in an attempt
to provide for the appointment of men as nurses in
the US Army, US Navy, and US Air Force. Finally
in 1955, Public Law 294, 84th Congress, again introduced by Congresswoman Bolton, authorized
commissions for male nurses in the US Army Reserve for assignment to the ANC Branch. The first
man to receive a commission in the ANC was a nurse
anesthetist in the fall of 1955. Men were eligible for
the Army Student Nurse Program established the
next year to help solve the acute shortage of nurses
in the Army. Finally, in 1962 men were authorized
to apply for the Registered Nurse Student Program
that had been established in 1953 to recruit registered nurses for the ANC. Thereafter, educational
opportunities for men and women were equal. 2
The social upheaval of the 1960s, along with major
improvements in the capabilities of healthcare delivery, forced reevaluation of what nurses and nursing
stood for in society. Nurse practitioners appeared
on the healthcare scene in 1965 when nurse Loretta
Ford and physician Henry Silver at the University
of Colorado educated nurses to provide primary
care for children and their families. The nurse practitioner movement, an approach to fill the physician gap to provide primary care to children and
those unable to pay, was enhanced by social agitation to fund educational programs and gained energy from the women’s movement in this attempt
to broaden nursing practice. Although initially supportive of this professional nursing development,
organized medicine has since sought to constrain
the scope of practice for nurse practitioners. 13
The substantive revision in 1968, the “Code for
Nurses,” dropped the word “professional” from the
title to indicate that the code applied to both professional and technical nurses. For the first time,
references to personal ethics were omitted. This was
a significant departure from the early focus of nursing educators and administrators on questions of
the moral purity of the probationer, trainee, and
graduate. 9 Instead of referring to the physician, this
version referred to members of other health professions. The 1968 Code provided nurses an ethical
framework within which to practice their profession
by addressing their responsibility to the patient, society, and the profession, and by participating in
research. 14
During this period, several thousand nurses who
served in Vietnam began to return to the private
sector. Although politicians, historians, and others
have said that the Vietnam conflict was different
from other American wars, a review of the literature reveals that the fundamental experience of
wartime for nurses was not much different. The
youth of the patients, the severity of injury, the lack
of feedback on patients’ progress after transfer, the
patient deaths that could not be prevented, the
deaths of friends, working with enemy patients, and
dealing with the triage situation are frequently cited
as stressors. Although caring for young wounded
casualties was reported to be stressful, it was also
considered to be gratifying. Like nurses who served
in World War I, World War II, or the Korean War,
these nurses felt a common pride in their accomplishments and the wartime role of the professional,
although these feelings may have been tempered
by the social and political circumstances. Returning to stateside nursing often required a considerable adjustment, from the clinical responsibility and
collaborative teamwork practiced in the war, to the
more restrictive roles still found in many settings.
The profession was just beginning to achieve autonomy. The structured healthcare environment was
very different from Vietnam. Some nurses became
angry and disillusioned about nursing practice,
some reverted to traditional roles, and others took
up the challenge to promote the status of the nursing profession. 15,16
Further changes in nursing and its social context
led to an update of the ethical code in 1976. The
“Code for Nurses With Interpretive Statements”
placed new emphasis on the responsibility of the
patient to participate in his own care (self-determination), the notion of nursing autonomy, and the
nurse’s role as client advocate. The word “client”
rather than “patient” was used in an attempt to be
less restrictive and to imply a more egalitarian relationship. However, “client” implies that the recipient of care can make a choice of care provider. Yet,
the bulk of nursing practice does not include that
type of choice on the part of recipients and may
connote unintended change in the nurse–patient
relationship. 17 The ANA also formed a Committee
on Ethics that later published “Guidelines for
Implementing the Code for Nurses.”
The 1985 revision of the Code for Nurses retained
all 11 provisions unchanged from 1976. The preMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
668
amble, however, included a list of fundamental
principles of ethics and the interpretations more
closely reflected these principles and placed greater
emphasis on patients’ rights. For example, a reference to healthcare as a right of all citizens was
changed to reflect the availability and accessibility
of high-quality health services to all people. The
Code for Nurses reflected nursing’s changing relationship to society and the societal concerns of the
times. 18 During the mid-1990s, both organized nursing and the media promoted “advance practice
nurses” as one solution to a serious component of
America’s healthcare crisis—the need for greater
access to routine primary and preventive care. This
group of nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, certified registered nurse anesthetists, and clinical
nurse specialists represented 100,000 nurses who
generally had 18 months to three years of graduate
education beyond the baccalaureate, many with a
master’s degree.
Countless studies and analyses documented the
quality of care delivered by these direct care providers. Yet, every advance in their reimbursement
for services and broader prescriptive authority involved protracted negotiation within the healthcare
community. Professional challenges for these providers must continue to be addressed within the
framework that nurses value the distinctive contribution of individuals or groups and collaborate to
meet the shared goal of providing quality health
services. Also, in the 1990s both the ANA and the
ICN initiated comprehensive reviews of their codes.
Each organization wanted to reflect current ethical
standards for nurses—to make explicit the primary
goals, values and obligations of the profession. The
revised “ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses,” adopted
in 2000, begins with a very powerful preamble:
Nurses have four fundamental responsibilities: to
promote health, to prevent illness, to restore health
and to alleviate suffering. The need for nursing is
universal. Inherent in nursing is respect for human
rights, including the right to life, to dignity and to be
treated with respect. Nursing care is unrestricted by
considerations of age, color, creed, culture, disability
or illness, gender, nationality, politics, race or social
status. Nurses render health services to the individual, the family and the community and coordinate their services with those of related groups. 18(p2)
EXHIBIT 20-1
THE 2001 “CODE OF ETHICS FOR NURSES WITH INTERPRETIVE STATEMENTS”
•
The nurse, in all professional relationships, practices with compassion and respect for the inherent
dignity, worth, and uniqueness of every individual, unrestricted by considerations of social or economic status, personal attributes, or the nature of health problems.
•
The nurse’s primary commitment is to the patient, whether an individual, family, group, or community.
•
The nurse promotes, advocates for, and strives to protect the health, safety, and rights of the patient.
•
The nurse is responsible and accountable for individual nursing practice and determines the appropriate delegation of tasks consistent with the nurse’s obligation to provide optimum patient care.
•
The nurse owes the same duties to self as to others, including the responsibility to preserve integrity
and safety, to maintain competence, and to continue personal and professional growth.
•
The nurse participates in establishing, maintaining, and improving health care environments and
conditions of employment conducive to the provision of quality health care and consistent with the
values of the profession through individual and collective action.
•
The nurse participates in the advancement of the profession through contributions to practice, education, administration, and knowledge development.
•
The nurse collaborates with other health professionals and the public in promoting community, national, and international efforts to meet health needs.
•
The profession of nursing, as represented by associations and their members, is responsible for articulating nursing values, for maintaining the integrity of the profession and its practice, and for
shaping social policy.
Reproduced with permission from Code of Ethics for Nurses With Interpretive Statements (ISBN 1-55810-176-4). Washington,
DC: American Nurses Publishing; 2001: 4.
Nursing Ethics and the Military
669
The ICN Code comprises four elements: (1) nurses
and people, (2) nurses and practice, (3) nurses and
co-workers, and (4) nurses and the professions.
These elements provide a framework for standards
of ethical conduct.
The “Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive
Statements” adopted by the ANA in 2001 complements the ICN document. It provides a succinct
statement of the ethical obligations and duties of
every nurse, sets the profession’s nonnegotiable
ethical standard, and expresses nursing’s own understanding of its commitment to society. 19(p5) The
Code comprises nine provisions: three describe fundamental values and commitments of the individual nurse, three address expectations for optimal performance and loyalty to self and others, and
three address responsibilities to the profession and
community at large (Exhibit 20-1). The interpretative statements for each provision provide greater
specificity for practice within the contemporary
context of nursing. Again, the word “patient” is used
to refer to recipients of nursing care, although it is
acknowledged that the Code applies to nurses and
recipients of their services in all roles and settings.
The “Code of Ethics for Nurses” informs both the
nurse and society of the profession’s expectations
and requirements in ethical matters. It provides a
framework within which nurses can make ethical
decisions and discharge their responsibilities to the
public, other members of the healthcare team, and the
profession. These decisions are based on consideration
of consequences and of universal moral principles,
both of which prescribe and justify nursing actions.
Although the core value is respect for persons, there
is deep and abiding concern for fundamental ethical principles including: autonomy (self-determination), nonmaleficence (avoiding harm), beneficence
(doing good or positively benefiting another), veracity (truth telling), fidelity (keeping promises),
confidentiality (respecting privileged information),
and justice (treating people fairly). In summary, the
nurse’s daily practice is charged with compromise
and compassion, along with patient advocacy—
feelings that greatly influence and modify the work
ethics of the nursing profession. Table 20-1 provides
a summary of the evolution of the codes for nursing.
NURSING AND MEDICINE
The emphasis on nursing as a profession was
driven, in part, by the desire to shed the generally
inferior social and economic status assigned to
nurses in the medical hierarchy. By becoming professionals, nurses would enter the middle class and
so achieve a social parity with other middle-class
professionals, including physicians. 20
The authority for nursing, as for other professions, is based on a social contract between society
and the profession. Society grants the professions
authority over their essential activities and permits
considerable autonomy in the conduct of their affairs. The professions, in turn, are expected to act
responsibly, ever mindful of the public trust, and
to self-regulate to assure quality performance. The
social contract for nursing has been made specific,
over the years, through multiple actions. These actions include: (a) developing a code of ethics, (b)
standardizing nursing curricula, (c) establishing
educational requirements for entry into professional
practice, (d) procuring registration for graduates of
nursing programs, (e) establishing standards of
practice, (f) developing a body of knowledge derived from nursing research, (g) developing certification processes for the profession, and (h) other
works directed toward making more specific
nursing’s accountability to society. 20 Nurses are ethically and legally accountable for actions taken in
the course of nursing practice as well as for actions
delegated by the nurse to others assisting in the
delivery of nursing care. Individual moral responsibility requires a willingness to act on one’s moral
beliefs and to accept accountability for one’s actions.
Traditional ethical questions in healthcare involving issues such as euthanasia, abortion, experimentation, rationing, truth telling, and so forth, appear
to be the same for all healthcare professionals. Other
underlying principles or values for patient care are
also shared. These include: (a) acting in the best interest of the patient, (b) protecting patient confidentiality and dignity, (c) obtaining informed consent
for at-risk procedures, (d) obtaining consultations
when believed necessary, and (e) respecting the scientific method. Acting in the best interest of the
patient is an important component of the physician–
patient covenant and the relationship of other
healthcare professionals to the patient (including
but not limited to the nurse). This is important due
to the vulnerability and anxiety often felt by the
patient, an inability to care for his health at this
particular time, and potentially limited knowledge
to determine whether the recommended course of
treatment is indeed most beneficial.
“Nursing” is defined as the diagnosis and treatment of the human responses to actual or potential
health problems. It is the human response that reMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
670
TABLE 20-1
SUCCESSIVE REVISIONS OF THE CODE OF ETHICS FOR NURSES
DATE/TITLE
REFLECTION OF CONTENT
RATIONALE FOR CHANGES
First generally accepted, but unofficial,
code of ethics.
The nurse is primarily a citizen and public
servant; obedient, trustworthy, loyal, and
adept in social etiquette.
Criteria for professional status includes
registration in one state.
Nursing responsibility includes safeguarding the health and property of patients.
Medicine and nursing are distinct but
complementary entities; however, nursing
will not initiate treatment except in emergency.
The nurse is responsible to her profession
(shifted emphasis away from citizen and
servant).
Further enumeration of professional criteria.
Loyalty to the physician demands that the
nurse conscientiously follows his instruction.
Emphasizes disease prevention and health
promotion, stressing the nurse’s healthteaching role.
Introduces research as a means for improving nursing care.
Incorporates many elements of professional
relationships within the Code’s provisions.
Omits the statement about loyalty to the
physician.
Softens the statement about treatment by
using the term “medical treatment.”
Provides a prescriptive list of acceptable
standards for the nursing profession.
Nurses may disseminate scientific findings
without intention to endorse or promote
commercial products or services used in
studies.
Nurses or groups of nurses may advertise
professional services in conformity with
the standards of the nursing profession.
Response to the felt need of many nurses to have
their own pledge or oath.
First ANA attempt to adopt official code of ethics.
Reflects nursing as meeting a basic human need
and emerging as a profession.
Declares nursing a profession.
Expresses overt concern for the status and public
recognition of nursing as a profession.
First national code of nursing ethics for any country.
Uses “professional” in the title to emphasize nursing as a profession.
Begins to identify patient care functions (nursing
treatments) within its purview.
Addresses questions and problems regarding
nurses and advertising.
Attempts to define a code of ethics applicable to
nursing worldwide.
Growing numbers of nurse researchers and authors
seek to advertise their own publications and to
present research findings that may reference commercial products.
1893
Florence Nightingale Pledge
1926
A Suggested Code
1940
A Tentative Code
1950
Code for Professional Nurses
1953
International Code
of Nursing Ethics
1956
Code for Professional Nurses,
Amended
(Table 20-1 continues)
Nursing Ethics and the Military
671
mains the defining characteristic of nursing that
distinguishes it from medicine and the other health
professions. Nursing views the patient as a holistic
being. The goal of nursing is identification of human needs and actions appropriate in response to
those needs. When engaged in the process of making ethical choices in the clinical judgment process,
nurses tend to focus their cost-benefit analyses
around the impact of patients’ problems on quality
of life, emotional and physical suffering, and de1960
Code for Professional Nurses,
Revised
1968
Code for Nurses
1976
Code for Nurses
With Interpretive
Statements
1985
Code for Nurses
With Interpretive
Statements,
Revised
2000
The ICN Code of
Ethics for Nurses
2001
Code of Ethics for
Nurses With
Interpretive
Statements
Membership and participation in the professional organizations and participation
in defining and upholding standards of
practice and education is expected.
References the dependent and independent
functions of nursing.
Allows active participation in setting terms
of employment.
Deletes the term “professional.”
Deletes all statements about physicians.
Deletes all references to “personal ethics.”
Addresses the nurse’s responsibility to the
patient, society, and the profession.
Includes nurse participation in research.
Deletes sexist language and refers to “client” rather than “patient.”
Interpretive statements emphasize self-determination of the client and the nurse’s
role as client advocate.
Notes the obligation to contribute to the
profession’s development noted, including research.
Includes fundamental principles of ethics.
Updates interpretations, referring to “people”
instead of “citizen,” for example.
Respect for human rights is inherent in
nursing.
There are 9 provisions instead of 11. The
word “patient” is used again and “practice” is used to refer to the actions of the
nurse in all roles and settings.
Attention shifts from concern for content to concern
about enforcing the code in the practice setting.
The association of the word “plank” with political
meaning is intentional when referring to the description of each statement.
Applies to all registered nurses, graduates of hospital schools, technical colleges, and universities
in response to controversy over the definition of
technical and professional nurse.
The personal sphere is no longer deemed within
the purview of professional scrutiny.
Reflects the social upheaval of the 1960s and major innovations in healthcare delivery.
Uses nonsexist terminology and the word “client”
to reflect nursing’s attempt to be more inclusive.
Response to sensitivity regarding patient rights, informed consent, and shared decision making.
Reference to nursing autonomy and nurse-as-advocate reflects respect for the autonomy of the
patient and the nurse.
The ethical principles are reflected in the content
of the interpretative statements.
Places greater emphasis on inclusion, eligibility,
and patient rights.
Responds to the realities of nursing and healthcare
in a changing society. Guide for action based on
social values and needs. Supports refusal of
nurses to participate in activities that conflict
with caring and healing.
The provisions are more generalized in content and
the accompanying interpretive statements reflect
the contemporary context of nursing.
Table 20-1 continued
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
672
gree of human function based on respect for persons. 21 For example, while taking a nursing history
or providing physical care for a patient, the nurse
will pick up cues on how the individual interacts
within his personal, family, and community systems.
This information is often helpful in assisting the
individual to cope with, or adjust to, the specific
health need that initiated their interaction. Nurses
frequently serve as an intermediary between patient
and physician, encouraging the patient to ask questions he wants answered, and interpreting, explaining, or reaffirming information provided by the
physician. The nurses’ psychology tends toward an
unconditional love for patients under their care, which
also affects the daily ethical behavior of nurses.
Medicine is described as the science and art of
preventing, alleviating, and curing disease. By extension, any issue or problem deriving from that
generic body of knowledge and any application of
it belongs to the general category of medical concern. 22 Physicians typically evaluate and diagnose
the presenting problem, prescribe the necessary interventions, and arrange follow-up as needed. They
tend to focus their cost-benefit analyses around
what is viewed as their primary duty to control,
diminish, or eradicate the disease and its effect. 21
Physicians’ concerns related to quality of life (particularly when considering withdrawing life-sustaining treatment for terminally ill patients), economic factors, and length of stay reflect the
profession’s increasing concern about the cost of
care and the proper use of resources. 23 Physicians
have not historically become as involved in patients’
psychosocial systems and responses as do nurses.
A dramatic example, as told by a colleague, illustrates this difference:
A surgical team from a highly developed country
was working in a foreign nation where the motor
scooter is a primary means of personal transportation. A below-knee-amputation was performed on
a young wife wounded by an antipersonnel land
mine. Due to ensuing severe toxicity, the surgeon
recommended a hip disarticulation to assure saving the patient’s life. The nurse argued for an aboveknee-amputation as an intermediate step so that
riding on a scooter would still be possible. A hip
disarticulation was performed and the patient was
prepared for discharge. When her husband arrived
to pick her up, she was unable to balance on the
back of his scooter. He drove away without her and
the patient died, “heartbroken,” two weeks later. 24
This example illustrates that the practice of medicine tends toward the disease-fighting model, concentrating on the application of research and cure.
The healthcare system—from medical education to
reimbursement—calls physician attention to sick
cells, organs, tissues, and limbs rather than relating to the patient. By contrast, nursing tends toward
the psychological and social meaning of illness,
concentrating on patient advocacy and care. Although it is absurd to say that nurses care while
physicians cure (because in reality physicians try
to help their patients cope with the experience of
illness, and, of course, nurses help patients to be
cured), there is nonetheless a distinct difference
between nursing and medicine.
Theories on differences in behavior date back to
the ancient Greeks, as shown in the Corpus Hippocraticum, regarding the doctor–patient relationship.
The formulation of their bond was established on
the basis of love of nature through a specific man,
the patient. Because of his disease, a sick man is a
good friend to a doctor. In the case of the physician, it is assumed where there is love of man there
is love of the art. The goal of this friendship was
human perfection through knowledge—the pursuit
of perfection. In the case of nurses, woman healers,
or midwives, however, it was the recognition of
what was necessary and a relationship that prevailed through concrete affection toward specific
individuals. This distinction dates back to antiquity
and is expressed today in the daily attitude of physicians and nurses. This creates a difference in perceptions and judgment, behavior, and ethical reasoning. The physician has intellectual honesty, the
nurse emotional truthfulness; that is why both professions are complementary and needed by each
other. 25 The challenge is to get each profession to
recognize their mutuality and need for collaboration in providing their respective services in the best
interest of the patient.
Ethical dilemmas arise when miscommunication
and controversy occur among patient, family, physician, nurse, and other healthcare professionals.
When discussion and mutual decision making occur among those involved, there is less probability
of ethical controversy becoming an issue. In spite
of many independent functions, no one on the
healthcare team functions independently of others
in providing total healthcare to those being served.
Although there is no special brand of ethical reasoning or moral intuition “for nurses only,” the continuing clarification of nursing’s identity as a profession has significantly increased each nurse’s ethical
accountability in the realm of nursing practice. The
developments in nursing research and knowledge
in recent years have stimulated thoughtful reflection and debate on the philosophical basis of ethical judgment in the nursing profession. By virtue
Nursing Ethics and the Military
673
of their pervasive presence in healthcare settings
and the continuity of their care to individuals, families, and community groups, nurses may be more concerned with some ethical issues than with others. The
goal of nursing actions is directed toward supporting
and enhancing patient self-determination, which is
basic to respect for persons, and is demonstrated
through advocacy. Multiple biopsychosocial factors
must be considered in deciding the plan of care. In
reality, this decision, certainly in most cultures, would
involve multiple discussions with the patient and family and among members of the healthcare team.
ETHICAL DECISION MAKING
A review of the literature does not substantiate a
significant difference in the decision-making processes nurses and physicians use in solving ethical
problems. The real difference may be how each
views the patient or client from a combination of
his or her personal and professional perspectives.
The trend is not to adhere to a particular ethical
theory because this approach tends to embody only
one point of view, may lead to an erroneous stereotypic solution, and is most likely impractical. The
discipline of ethics has shifted from a focus on
rights-based universal principles to a concern with
how individual stories are embedded within particular communities. Today, most healthcare professionals employ a framework of ethical principles,
rules, and judgments rather than whole ethical theories in analyzing ethical dilemmas. Although this
approach considers the crucial principles, the issues
that are summarized by the ethics principles have
prominence along with the context of the dilemma
and the preferences for action expressed by those
involved. Strong principled reasons must underpin
the duty, obligation, or point of view for an ethical
dilemma to exist. Ethical analysis proceeds as clear
reasons are given, principles enunciated, and outcomes considered. The ethical analysis of a dilemma
consists of moral reasoning or a system of justification that offers a rationale for decision making and
action. 26(p41)
Nurses in their moral reasoning, according to
Garritson,27 apply the principle of beneficence more
frequently than the principles of autonomy and justice, and the beneficence/autonomy balance in their
moral reasoning is parallel to the care/justice tension Gilligan28 described. Cooper29 found that
nurses relied on both a principle-oriented framework (self-determination and nursing obligation)
and a moral response of care involving attention to
the details of patients’ experiences. Peter and Gallop30 also found that nursing students use care considerations more than justice considerations, but
their moral orientation could best be described as
mixed. When nursing students were compared with
medical students, the differences seemed to relate
to gender, not profession; that is, women were more
likely than men to use care considerations in their
moral reasoning. Both genders and both nursing
and medical students use a mixture of care and justice considerations. 30
Conscious decision making may be minimized
by healthcare professionals who hold well-defined
value systems used in value ranking and tested
against standards of personal conscience, professional codes of ethics, and legal liability potential.
Grundstein-Amando31 noted that each carries his or
her own unique subjective views based on personal
experiences that ultimately affect the final course of
action. Nurses are typically motivated in their ethical behavior by the value of caring that encompasses
responsiveness and sensitivity to the patient’s
wishes. Nurses listen and try to understand the
patient. They will seek vivid indications of the
patient’s feelings, intentions, and interests, gaining
knowledge through personal touch and concrete
interaction with the patient. They will attempt to
maintain and sustain a relationship that reflects the
patient’s own specific terms and contexts, not necessarily invoking any rules of justice and equality.
They take into consideration love, compassion, and
tenderness, which give value to human needs and
human weaknesses.
In contrast, physicians tend to value patients’ rights
and the scientific approach that implies a major concern with disease and its cure. Physicians will talk with
the patient and will try to understand the patient’s
broad perspectives and motivating forces attempting
to establish a relationship best described as an interaction between two separate individuals who aim to
resolve together an ethical problem. The information
that generates the knowledge held by the physician
may be considered impersonal and universal, based
on established ideals of medical practice and patient
rights. In summary, these two groups view the
patient’s best interests from different perspectives. 31
The following example shows how the nurse arrived at a moral perspective that seemed to differ
from that of the patient and physicians, based on
subjective knowledge of the patient and objective
knowledge of the course of his illness and long-term
care needs. The patient, an 84-year-old retired infantry colonel, widowed and living alone, was
transferred to a medical unit following a lengthy
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
674
stay in the intensive care unit. Although alert and
oriented, he was very frail. The nurse got to know
him well as he fought to regain independence, insisting everything be done to maximize his recovery, and resisting any discussion about the possible
need for transfer to a nursing home in the near future. As his recovery stalled, it became obvious to
the nurse that nursing home care would be needed
and that this was unacceptable to the colonel. She
approached the attending physician about reviewing resuscitation status with the patient, but he decisively deferred to the patient’s previous request
that everything be done to keep him alive. During
the fourth week, the patient developed a severe infection and became gravely ill. The resident physicians on duty prescribed aggressive resuscitation
with intravenous fluids and dopamine, followed by
nasotracheal suctioning and urinary catheterization. The thought of performing cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and intubating this patient was disturbing to the nurse as she did not think the patient wanted to be kept alive with machines and
medications. After the initial crisis, she discussed
her concerns with the residents, who responded that
they wanted to hold off on the Do-Not-Resuscitate
issue at present. Fearing time was running out, she
again approached the attending physician. Together, at the bedside, they reviewed the situation
and treatment options with the patient. The patient
requested resuscitation short of ventilation. This
request was honored and aggressive treatment continued; the patient died of respiratory arrest 36
hours later. Although in this situation the resident
physicians were clinically correct in responding to
the patient’s initial request, the nurse believed that
her knowledge of the patient and his course of illness called for reassessing and reaffirming his
wishes. Therefore, she contacted the attending physician and obtained an acceptable outcome. 32
It often becomes necessary to strike an acceptable
balance between the emphasis on autonomy and one’s
commitment to beneficence and nonmaleficence
depending on the cultural context, specific situation, and the patient and healthcare professionals
involved. It was not all that long ago that patients
in our culture were often not told of a terminal diagnosis. The commitment to autonomy reflects a
change in our ethical standards and healthcare expectations. Even now, when patients overwhelmed
with information find themselves incapable of making a treatment choice or find the choices unsatisfactory, concern is expressed whether promoting
autonomy may result in harm to the patient. In some
cultures, healthcare professionals routinely do not
disclose the diagnosis and prognosis to the patient
in situations of terminal illness. Instead, the family
is informed so they can ensure a social context of
comfort for the patient. In this situation, healthcare
professionals intend to protect the patients by relieving them of the burden of decision making, allowing them to feel secure and to gather their own
resources for coping with their illness.
RESOLVING ETHICAL DILEMMAS
Clinical Interactions
Clinical ethics for nurses in the military versus
those in the private sector, and for nurses in one of
the military services versus another, do not really
differ. Although it is true that military nurses may
not always serve in locations of their choice, and
the traditional practice settings of land, sea, or air,
particularly during armed conflict, may be different for nursing in the Army, Navy, and Air Force,
basic ethical decision making is not affected.
The overlay of wartime nursing does, however,
add professional strain and certain moral dilemmas.
Nurses are routinely exposed to the casualties of
war. Casualties include their comrades, prisoners,
detainees, and injured civilians (indigenous and
displaced persons and refugees). Among the latter,
women, children, and older persons are especially
vulnerable. These nurses are confronted with great
numbers of patients, many to survive with high
degrees of long-term disability, and some unavoidable deaths, over a prolonged period of time. Military nurses began to deal with triage and rapid
evacuation, as we know it today, during World War
II. These systems, improved during the Korean and
Vietnam conflicts, have served as models for peacetime mass casualty care and trauma centers.
Vietnam nurse veterans reported several experiences that caused the most stress. They included:
(a) treating patients who in many cases were
younger than they, (b) encountering wounds more
severe than they had previously seen, (c) dealing
with patients who often put concerns about their
buddies ahead of themselves, (d) evacuating a patient and losing touch with his case, (e) accepting a
system of treatment—triage—that may have been
based on expediency but violated every creed of
accepted nursing practice (treating the less injured
first), (f) and the deaths of those counted as friends.
They also recounted being troubled by these dilemNursing Ethics and the Military
675
mas—sending recovered patients back into the field
where they might be wounded again or killed (although the mission was to keep the combat units at
fighting strength)—and working with physicians,
nurses, and enlisted men who were prejudiced
against the Vietnamese (although caring for wounded
enemy and refugees was commonplace). 1 Prisoners
and detainees are entitled to healthcare, humane
treatment, and the right to refuse these offers and
to die with dignity in a peaceful manner. Nurses
are often the first to suspect or detect ill treatment
of these persons and must take appropriate actions
to safeguard their rights. This is an awesome responsibility. 33
The Vietnam conflict had a dramatic effect on the
professional philosophy and career decisions of
many nurses. 1 Of 50 veterans interviewed, 60% reported they returned home with a stronger commitment to the profession and felt they could do
their jobs well and handle challenging situations.
About half of the group changed their clinical work
to another specialty or a different type of practice
setting. The majority (72%) said they would volunteer for duty in a war zone today. The 12 on active
duty remained close to their war experiences in
other ways: Three Air Force nurses and one who
was in the US Army in Vietnam fly on medical
evacuation planes and use their expertise to train
other nurses; several US Navy nurses helped design new hospital ships; and a number of US Army
nurses used their experiences to train and plan future requirements for nurses in war situations. 1
In any clinical setting, weighing competing principles that support alternative courses of action is
the essence of resolving ethical dilemmas. Clinical
decisions are often approached from several perspectives including law, self-interest, professional
codes and guidelines, clinical standards, and ethical principles. Striving to make right decisions and
avoid making wrong ones is a common goal of
healthcare professionals as they address the health
and comfort of patients in their care. From the perspective of law, decisions must be consistent with
legal rules to minimize the risk of prosecution and
lawsuits. From the perspective of self-interest, decisions may advance the welfare of the professional
or the institution, but they should not constrain
moral action. Internal constraints include lack of
professional confidence, fear, and insecurity. External constraints may include the authority of physicians, the policies and directives of hospital, medical, or nursing administration, or the threat of legal
action. Many of these constraints, deeply rooted in
history, are part of the socialization of the healthcare
professions and the organization of healthcare services. This influence has been considered to be so
strong that nurses in some settings did not always
feel free to be moral. 34
The military environment must be sensitive to
the influence of relationships between superiors and
subordinates, particularly as related to rank and
position. In today’s environment, relationships between powerful superiors and subordinates are often viewed as coercive even when there is no specific allegation of harassment. For professional
nurses, being commissioned as officers somewhat
levels the playing field; yet, position within their
practice setting could be an issue. Appropriate use
of the chain of command will resolve these instances
should they occur. One such resolution is illustrated
by the following quotation:
[T]here was [sic] five or six of them and me. And
again, I’m a lieutenant, they all like way outrank
me and…there wasn’t [sic] any other nurses there
either, it was just all docs and they were all…banding
together against me. And that’s when I said, okay,
forget it, you know, if they’re gonna [sic] pull this
kind of communication style, I’m going to enlist
the support of my chain of command, and pull
them in.…Things went smoothly. Um, much more.
It started unofficially with just Mr. Y there. One of
the…surgeons, the vascular surgeon who’s the
chief though, so it was somebody who was actually was further up in the chain of things, and then
the chief resident of the SICU [surgical intensive
care unit] service, and my head nurse and I. So there
was the six of us in the room together and communication was more professional and open. 35
To assure an environment where professional
nurses bear primary responsibility and accountability for the nursing care patients receive, the Army
Medical Department Standards of Nursing Practice was
published in 1981. This comprehensive document
referenced a symposium on bioethical issues in
nursing and the ANA Code for Nurses. It was noted
that “implementation of these standards will serve
to enhance the cooperative and collaborative relationships of the health care team who seek to provide optimal health care to patients and their
families.”36(p1-1)
As members of the healthcare team so integrally
involved in patient care, and as part of their role as
patient advocates, nurses should participate in ethical decision-making processes. Over the past 25
years, there has been a rapid increase in the number of institutional ethics committees in healthcare
facilities and nursing participation in committee
activities. Committees are now interdisciplinary,
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
676
having administrators, physicians, nurses, clergy,
social workers, and attorneys represented. It is common to have members from other healthcare disciplines, patient representatives, quality improvement facilitators, ethics consultants or philosophers,
and healthcare consumers of the institution represented as well. The more open the committee is to
multidisciplinary participation, both as members
and for consultation or referrals, the better the setting should be to address the ethical issues, questions, or dilemmas of staff and consumers.
The usefulness of the multidisciplinary approach
to address ethical dilemmas is shown in the following case where caregivers held divergent views of
what was in the best interest of the patient.
Case Study 20-1: Life Following Tragedy. A young
soldier had suffered a severe wound caused by a grenade explosion; the severed spinal medulla led to an irreversible paralysis from the neck down. Excellent surgical and medical treatment kept the patient alive. When
he became aware of his irreversible condition, the soldier begged to die. The doctors maintained him on
parenteral nutrition while the nurses wanted to discuss
the young man’s future. The doctors’ attitude was one of
denial while the nurses’ was one of oversensitivity toward
the patient’s demands. This led to underlying conflict between the doctors and nurses. Finally, the case was debated during a grand rounds session attended by representatives of the hospital ethics committee. This, by itself,
reduced the anguish.
Comment: Abrupt tragedy, like the experience of this
young soldier, not only affects the patient and significant
others but also those providing his care. In the initial days
following the event, the physicians focused on sustaining
life while the nurses tended to focus on the meaning and
quality of life. When each stepped back from the immediacy of the situation during grand rounds, their views
could be presented and discussed, along with those held
by others. After all, the healthcare disciplines are taught
that rehabilitation begins with admission, and certainly in
this case, there was much work to be done.
A survey of Army hospitals in 1986 confirmed
that the prevalence of medical ethics programs paralleled that of the private sector. 37 Most respondents
recognized the advisory or consultative role as being most useful. The educational, case review, and
policy interpretation roles were viewed as beneficial but not to the same extent. A similar survey in
the metropolitan New York area reported that all
participating institutions included nurses as members of the hospital ethics committee. 38 Although
most nurses held administrative and management
positions, a few members were from clinical positions, particularly specialty areas such as critical
and emergency care. The topics most frequently
addressed by ethics committees, in descending order, were Do-Not-Resuscitate, withhold-withdraw
treatment, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS), allocation of resources, patient rights, and
death and dying. When asked to identify those issues “most important” in nursing practice, respondents reordered the same topics and added professional practice issues as second most important. 38
An ANA publication, Ethical Dilemmas in Contemporary Nursing, included chapters on similar issues. 39 Some of the topics were Do-Not-Resuscitate,
advance management preferences, informed consent, the patient who refused to be fed, the issue of
restraints, and care of the pediatric patient with
AIDS. The practical ethical questions that may arise
in the clinical management of patients frequently
include scenarios related to these topics. How
nurses, physicians, patients, families, and other
members of the team approach resolution of these
issues is important to all. Obviously, in many clinical situations more than one solution, right answer,
or treatment option is possible. Culture, religious
and political beliefs, and socioeconomic circumstances influence the final choices.
Considering the complexities of today’s healthcare
environment, influenced by rapid technological and
scientific advances (genetic engineering, for example), multiple treatment alternatives, escalating
costs, an aging population, and so forth, it is not
unexpected that various healthcare professionals
would hold differing opinions depending on their
vantage point. If one assumes that the primary concern of these professionals is the well-being of the
patient, then it is imperative for them to come together as a team to promote this goal. To resolve
conflict and deal appropriately with ethical questions, recognition of each other’s rightful authority, competencies, and value to the total care of the
patient is essential. The greater the degree of collaboration between nurses and physicians caring for
the patient and family, the easier it becomes to find
resolution. Attributes of collaborative practice include mutual trust and respect, and shared decision making, responsibility, and accountability.
Mutual trust and respect implies appreciation and
understanding of each other’s work, knowledge,
and experience including the different views or
perspective of a patient than the other may hold.
Shared decision making requires understanding
that professionals are interdependent and have a
commitment to approach the negotiation process
with an open mind. 30
Treatment options are expected to reflect comNursing Ethics and the Military
677
pliance with relevant professional codes and guidelines and should be based on appropriate clinical
norms and standards. Decisions should also be consistent with general ethical principles. Decisions
that seem right from one perspective, however, may
not be right according to other perspectives and vice
versa. Therefore, it is not feasible in some situations
to clearly satisfy the best choice from all perspectives. Clinical data and ethical considerations must
be weighed in considering the patient’s best interests. Patients’ particular preferences and values can
be of great assistance in reaching the best decision.
Patients are likely to be consistent and trustworthy
advocates of their own interests as long as they
maintain decision-making capacity. In the exceptional clinical situations when the healthcare team
cannot resolve recalcitrant ethical conflicts among
themselves or with the patient and family or both,
consultation with institutional ethics committees or
consultation services can be of great assistance with
ethical dilemmas, just as consultation with specialists can help resolve difficult clinical questions.
Continuing Education
The increase in complexity of nursing practice
has given rise to many ethical dilemmas. Nursing’s
commitment to patient care should always be directed
toward supporting and enhancing the patient’s selfdetermination because “health is not necessarily an
end in itself, but is rather a means to a life that is
meaningful”40(pi) from the patient’s perspective. The
fundamental search for meaning in life can be
viewed through observing the ethical and moral
aspects of human actions. This is the case for the
“why” and the “what for” of health and, therefore,
associated with the medical act. We do not live to
be healthy, instead we are or want to be healthy to
live and work. However, it is worth raising the question, “Why do we live and work?” To reach and
capture the sense of this meaning and to fulfill this
role, nurses must be accountable advocates, although the patient is the primary decision maker
in matters concerning personal health, treatment,
and well-being. 40 Continuing education is required
for nurses to maintain their competence and to enhance their professional advancement. It is an essential component of human resources development
for nurses to support a high level of knowledge,
skill, and commitment for the provision of quality
care.
According to Smith,41 nurses need to recognize
the ethical nature of their work, discern which ethical decisions are theirs to make, and acknowledge
their authority to make ethical decisions in their
practice. To achieve this end, the Carruths42 concluded that continuing education might provide the
most sound basis for the ongoing development and
improvement of a practitioner’s ethical conduct.
The fundamental goals for continuing education in
ethics are to increase understanding of ethically
related issues, to increase awareness of other
healthcare professionals’ feelings regarding ethical
issues, and to increase the ability to form ethical
arguments and justify decisions. Taking it one step
further, it is equally important to recognize, respect,
and adopt a multidisciplinary approach to these
decisions for the best interest of the patient. To be
human, responsible, caring, and moral in the clinical setting is a burden shared by all.
Actually, Smith41 supported this approach in her
discussion of deliberation and integration as two
distinct components of the ethical decision-making
process. Deliberation is the process an individual
nurse uses to arrive at an ethical decision. Much
has been published about nurses perceiving a lack
of power or authority to make ethical decisions or
act as free moral agents. Smith concluded that the
problem is not significantly related to deliberation—how nurses consider their integrity, perspectives, consequences, and priorities, and arrive at a
decision—but directly related to difficulty with the
process of integration. Nurses have perceived a lack
of power to effect the larger clinical ethical decision. Therefore an important goal of continuing
education in ethics for nurses is to assist nurses in
developing methodologies for participating as team
members in the clinical ethical decisions made daily.
The following quotation illustrates how a junior
nurse in the military setting chose to deal with what
she perceived to be an ethical dilemma regarding
one of her patients:
I talked to the residents that were there in the room
at the time, the SICU residents and the cardiologist
happened to be on the ward as well and I just kind
of said, “Look, did you guys like talk to the family,
do you really think he understood what was going
on?” And got a somewhat abrupt and rude reply,
basically,…“it’s none of the family’s business…of
course he understood he signed his name.” And I
said…and I was like, “I don’t think so,” so I took it
up a step further to the senior resident and it got
even uglier. And so then I went up my chain and
just talked to the nursing supervisor and my head
nurse. My head nurse then said, “No,…let’s get
everybody together and find out what the scoop
is.” And from there it went to a formal ethics consult, because the consent for surgery could easily
be documented as illegal and unethical. 35
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
678
To enhance the process of developing team methodologies for attending to ethical issues at the
Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, DC,
the bioethics education program, “Decisions Near
the End of Life,” was implemented in 1996. The
goals of the program, developed jointly by the Education Development Center, Inc. and the Hastings
Center, are to:
• increase and improve communication between providers and patients, and among
providers caring for the same patient
around difficult issues of medical ethics;
• identify resources to help institutions examine their policies and procedures, develop new ones as needed, and bring practice into line with current policy; and
• demonstrate appropriate roles and responsibilities for healthcare professionals fostering teamwork and conflict resolution.
Case studies are used to address the difficult
questions and ethical dilemmas that arise in the use
of life-sustaining treatment for critically and terminally ill adults. Participants include physicians,
nurses, social workers, administrators, attorneys,
and pastoral counselors as well as other healthcare
providers. This example demonstrates one approach to continuing education in ethics, an important component of professional development. 43
Another approach is demonstrated at the Naval
Medical Center, Portsmouth, Virginia. Every member of the multidisciplinary Medical Ethics Committee is obliged to complete an ethics-training
course and to undertake a continuing program of
self-education. Available educational materials include: (a) written information and workshops on
clinical ethics, (b) direct involvement in mock and
real consultations, and (c) skills in communication,
group leadership, individual and group dynamics,
mediation, self-awareness, and multicultural sensitivity.
The ethics training course covers the: (a) history,
mission, and scope of ethics committees; (b) command instructions involving ethical issues; (c) legal concerns involving ethical considerations of
clinical care; and (d) obligations, focusing on disclosure, assessment of capacity, the informed consent process, confidentiality, and truthfulness. This
leads to clinical ethics issues such as refusal of treatment, foregoing life sustaining treatment, controversial reproductive choices, access and cost, death
and dying, and diverse cultural and religious traditions affecting decision making. Due to the extensive education and training commitment, members appointed to the Medical Ethics Committee
serve for the duration of their tour of duty at the
Naval Medical Center, Portsmouth. 44
The US Air Force has several ongoing initiatives
in education, administration, practice, and research
that focus on the ethical dimensions of healthcare.
This, along with the appointment of a consultant
for nursing ethics by the Air Force Surgeon General, reflects the position of nurses as moral agents.
In addition to facility-wide ethics education programs and processes designed for comprehensive
management of ethical and moral concerns, there
is discussion of the moral reasoning process, ethical considerations, and the development of cultural
competence in preparation for deployment to humanitarian and peacekeeping operations. These
operations, for all the military services, may be in
response to human-induced (eg, armed conflict,
environmental degradation, industrial accidents) or
natural (flood, earthquake, volcano) disasters. An
immediate response to care for victims may be required, so readiness related to disaster response and
preparedness plans is essential. 45 Similarities and
differences between the practice environments at
home and in deployed settings are explored. The
challenges confronted during previous deployments are transformed into “lessons learned,” and
the information is integrated into readiness training exercises. Innovations and efforts at Air Force
healthcare facilities have included: (a) interdisciplinary ethics committees along with consultative services for patient care concerns; (b) improved communication processes to address ethical issues and
to share information from both the academic and
practice communities; and (c) classes, courses, and
conferences to teach ethics and moral reasoning.
Access to the Internet, Worldwide Web, and e-mail
facilitates communication on ethical issues as well
as the use of more traditional reference sources. 46
The Worldwide Web has the potential to be the
best mode of delivery for ethics education. The
Nursing Ethics Network (which can be accessed at
www.bc.edu/nursing,ethics) has identified the
need for ethics education and research resources as
the two most frequent reasons nurses turn to their
Internet ethics service. Nurses are asking for help
with professional competence questions and complex care decisions with an ethical component and
seeking resources for advancement of ethics within
their work setting. Members of the advisory board
with ethics expertise respond to the questions. They
do not provide answers but assist nurses to find
resolutions themselves. 47
Nursing Ethics and the Military
679
Nursing Research
The 2001 “Code of Ethics for Nurses With Interpretive Statements” promotes nursing behaviors
that contribute to the ongoing development of the
profession’s body of knowledge. Therefore, nurse
researchers investigate the many factors known to
affect human health for the purpose of developing
clinical interventions and providing information
that will guide and improve nursing practice. The
focus is to expand the body of knowledge related
to the enhancement of personal health, to ameliorate pain and suffering, and to improve patient care
in a manner that will restore individuals, or communities, or both to their highest level of functioning. 48
All nurses have a role in the research process,
whether they are principal investigators, subjects, or
merely consumers of research. It is the responsibility
of every nurse to develop an awareness of nursing
research, to use it in patient care, and to articulate it
in patient/family education. In the clinical setting,
nurses caring for patients who are research subjects
serve as patient advocates, identifying potential ethical problems related to their participation in the research protocol. Nurses, at time of employment,
should be informed regarding their expected roles as
subjects or data collectors in research projects. Early
publications by the ANA on the rights of persons who
participate in research included the 1975 “Human
Rights Guidelines for Nurses in Clinical and Other
Research,” and the 1976 guidelines for the “Preparation of Nurses for Participation in and Utilization of
Research.” More recently the association published,
“Ethical Guidelines in the Conduct, Dissemination,
and Implementation of Nursing Research.” This comprehensive document provides a detailed framework
for ethical nursing research. The focus is on nine ethical principles with commentary and research guidelines for each principle49 (Exhibit 20-2).
Although military nurses were highly instrumental in establishing nursing research in general, documentation of when and where military nurses first
became involved in research is rather vague. However, Dr. Harriet Werley referenced articles describing Army nurses’ early work in relation to research
in military situations:
EXHIBIT 20-2
ETHICAL PRINCIPLES IN THE CONDUCT, DISSEMINATION, AND IMPLEMENTATION OF
NURSING RESEARCH
1.
The investigator respects autonomous research participants’ capacity to consent to participate in
research and to determine the degree and duration of that participation without negative consequences.
2.
The investigator prevents harm, minimizes harm, and/or promotes good to all research participants,
including vulnerable groups and others affected by the research.
3.
The investigator respects the personhood of research participants, their families, and significant others, valuing their diversity.
4.
The investigator ensures that the benefits and burdens of research are equitably distributed in the
selection of research participants.
5.
The investigator protects the privacy of research participants to the maximum degree possible.
6.
The investigator ensures the ethical integrity of the research process by use of appropriate checks
and balances throughout the conduct, dissemination, and implementation of the research.
7.
The investigator reports suspected, alleged, or known incidents of scientific misconduct in research
to appropriate institutional officials for investigation.
8.
The investigator maintains competency in the subject matter and methodologies of his or her research, as well as in other professional and societal issues that affect nursing research and the public
good.
9.
The investigator involved in animal research maximizes the benefits of the research with the least
possible harm or suffering to the animals.
Source: Silva M. Ethical Guidelines in the Conduct, Dissemination, and Implementation of Nursing Research (D-95 5M 5/95).
Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1995: 4.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
680
Clara Maass’ participation in the yellow fever experiments in 1901, which resulted in her death; Sara E.
McCallister’s work and association with studies of
wounds and infection; Claussen’s patient categorization according to nursing care needs; Charlotte
Rodeman’s work with the milieu therapy study
group; Mada F. Woodward’s and Alice S. Clark’s work
on reducing bacterial count in hospital areas through
hospital disinfection with beta-propiolactone; Phyllis
J. Verhonick’s research on decubiti; Mariam K.
Ginsberg’s research on oral and nasal hygiene; and
Jacqueline H. Sellees and Ann E. Yodees study of temperature readings. 50(p52)
Werley also described the supporter, technician,
consultant, collaborator, and investigator roles of
nurses in research. 51 The establishment of the Department of Nursing at Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research, Washington, DC, in 1957 created an
unprecedented and unique opportunity for US
Army nurses. Nurse investigators, assigned to the
unit and free of nursing service commitments, had
the opportunity to assist and learn from accomplished investigators. These early pioneers were
committed to the pursuit of research in nursing
practice and viewed Walter Reed General Hospital, adjacent to the Institute, as a fertile clinical laboratory. 52 From 1961 until 1969, seven classes totaling 28 nurses attended the 10-month-long Military
Nursing Practice and Research Course. The unit
continues today, now known as the Nursing Research Service, Department of Nursing, Walter Reed
Army Medical Center. Current research projects,
under the auspices of this unit, include significant
participation in the Tri-Service Nursing Research
Program. 53
Since the 1960s, the US Army Nurse Corps has
provided graduate education in civilian university
programs for selected, promising nurse researchers. Over time, the US Army designated a nursing
research consultant to the Army surgeon general
(1968), formed the Nursing Research Advisory
Board (1976), established the biennial Phyllis J.
Verhonick Nursing Research Symposium (1981),
and implemented a regional approach to support
nursing research. Much of the military nursing research literature is contained in theses, dissertations
and studies from training programs, available only
through the National Technical Information Service
or the Defense Technical Information Service. The
history of nursing research in the US Navy and US
Air Force has been traced through the review of
unpublished masters’ theses and mimeographed
documents from the School of Aerospace Medicine,
Brooks Air Force Base, Texas. More formal nursing
research endeavors began in the US Air Force in the
late 1960s and in the US Navy in the early 1980s. 54
The Tri-Service Nursing Research Program was
established in fiscal year 1992 when Congress appropriated initial funding of $1 million to support
targeted research by military nurses. The purpose
of the program is to improve nursing care for Department of Defense beneficiaries by expanding the body
of scientific knowledge upon which military nursing practice is based. Research funded by this initiative should have a positive impact on healthcare
and the health status of military populations. In
1993, the call for proposals identified ethics studies
as one of the priorities for funding. Current studies
with ethical implications, funded by the program,
include: (a) Nurse–Patient Relationship Patterns: An
Economic Resource; (b) Effects of Separation on
Families During Hospitalizations; (c) The Lived
Experience of Military Women Who Discontinued
Breast Feeding Before Planned; (d) The Effects of
Culturally Sensitive Messages and Health Beliefs;
(e) Fatigue Following Childbirth: Military Family
Outcomes; (f) The Experience of Chief Nurses in
Military Operations Other Than War; (g) Neurometric
Assessment of the Effects of Analgesia; and (h) Listening to Voices of Women in a Family Advocacy
Program. 55
During its first 4 years, the Tri-Service Nursing
Research Program developed a $9. 68 million portfolio of 77 projects conducted by nurses in the
armed forces. Awards were granted to members of
all three military services, including active, reserve,
and guard components. “Military nursing research
addresses many areas: the unique military environmental settings in which care is provided; mission
readiness and deployment of military personnel;
and improving nursing structure (delivery systems)
and processes to enhance clinical outcomes, health
status and quality of life of diverse military personnel, their beneficiaries, and populations receiving
care during humanitarian, peacetime, and wartime
missions.”53(p17) Findings from military nursing research not only benefit the military, but in many
cases also benefit the private sector.
Nursing Administration
Ethical dilemmas in the practice of nursing administration differ from those in clinical nursing.
Yet, obligations to patients, staff members, and the
profession involve judgments about justice, fidelity, and beneficence. The resolution process remains
much the same for most ethical dilemmas. Nurse
administrators, as any organizational leader or exNursing Ethics and the Military
681
ecutive, are morally obligated to use their influence
and power responsibly to better serve their constituents. In various situations, nurse administrators
may experience conflicting expectations and values.
These may include doing good for one patient or
employee versus benefiting all patients or employees; attending to the welfare of an individual or
group within the organization versus responsibility to the institution or organization as a whole; and
serving the moral obligations of administrative
practice concurrently with those of professional
nursing, including balancing costs and benefits.
Nurse administrators strive to provide safe and respectful work environments with adequate support
and resources where personnel provide quality care
to meet patient needs.
Recent changes in healthcare reimbursement systems have caused administrators to focus on ethical issues related to the appropriate use of human
and financial resources. Heightened competition for
nursing resources both within and among countries,
characterized by an increasing demand and a decreasing supply, has highlighted the importance of human resource planning and development at a global
level. Although career mobility and multicultural
practice are desirable, nurses must not be exploited
as the result of unscrupulous recruitment or inappropriate working conditions. Fair and cost-effective
recruitment and retention practices are an important component for assuring an adequate supply of
qualified and committed nursing personnel. 56
Research has identified administrative decisions
related to patient care issues as most likely to
present ethical dilemmas. These included staffing
level and mix situations, developing/maintaining
standards of care (quality), and the allocation of
scarce resources. Respondents also ranked those
decisions related to patient care issues as highest
in frequency of occurrence. Issues related to employee interpersonal or professional performance
were reported less often as presenting ethical dilemmas. These included problems related to physician
or nurse incompetence, demotion or termination of
employees, and employee relations. 57
Most nurse administrators are challenged to provide more cost-effective care, a goal of the restructuring occurring in the American healthcare system. The
aim is to reduce waste and costs, enhance efficiency
and access, and pass on savings to the purchasers of
healthcare without loss of quality. When nurses are
concerned that work redesign would compromise
the quality of care, Mahlmeister58 recommended
that the plan, action or activity be examined by asking three questions: (1) Is this legal? (2) Does this
violate an accepted or published standard? and (3)
Will this violate the ANA Code of Ethics?
With thorough answers to these questions, efforts
should be aimed at working at the lowest level possible in the system to resolve the issues in some
mutually agreeable manner. If this is unsuccessful,
top administration should be formally appraised of
the situation. If the employer does not correct the
problem, the nurse may need to move beyond the
agency and report these concerns to appropriate
authorities such as the state board of nursing. The
ANA published the 1994 “Guidelines on Reporting
Incompetent, Unethical or Illegal Practice” to assist
nurses confronted with questionable actions or situations. This document describes these types of conduct and reporting responsibilities, and provides a
model for action. 59
Nurses as patient advocates are expected to safeguard the client and the patient when healthcare
and safety are affected by incompetent, unethical,
or illegal practice by any person. Making the determination about what constitutes these behaviors is
a first step; determining what to do about it is not
always easy. Nurses frequently ask what they can
do and whom they can tell about unsafe or illegal
conditions that they are experiencing. They do not
want, however, to experience discrimination or harassment or lose their jobs. Their concerns are well
founded. If advocacy is the role of nursing, who
protects the nurse in the advocacy role? Nurses
must have the freedom to report unsafe practices
without undue concern. Employing institutions and
agencies providing nursing services have an obligation to establish a process for reporting and handling practices that jeopardize patient health or
safety. The method may be as informal as an “open
door” policy allowing staff members to take their
complaints through all chains of command or as
formal as a grievance and arbitration procedure.
The point is that some established process needs to
be in place for reporting questionable actions so that
nurses can pursue such matters through official
channels without fear of reprisal.
Protection from workplace violence, including
physical violence, sexual harassment, and verbal
abuse is also essential to assuring nurses’ rights to
personal dignity, integrity, and freedom from harm.
Among health personnel, the nursing staff is most
at risk. Many factors, such as the stress of sickness,
coping with potentially life-threatening situations,
interventions demanding close physical contact,
shift work, demanding workloads, and attitudes
about women may aggravate misbehavior. Adequate staffing levels, work methods that support
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
682
quality care, and fostering respectful treatment for
all help create a respectful and safe work environment. Appropriate security measures, confidential
grievance procedures, access to counseling services
and legal aid for victims and perpetrators of violence, and support of nurses during reporting/compensation and claim procedures reflect a “zero tolerance” of violence. 60
Such processes are necessary to balance the
mechanisms of control that permeate the healthcare
environment. These controls range from formal
power, associated with hierarchical supervision,
standard operating procedures, codes of conduct,
and accreditation requirements, to informal influences such as peer pressure and prevailing attitudes
within the organization. Recognition of the influence
or power exerted on patients, subordinates, and peers
is particularly cogent in the military setting where the
superior–subordinate relationship is overt.
Military nurse administrators, being both commissioned officers and professional nurses, bear a
dual responsibility to develop and sustain the ethical climate. As officers and leaders, the authority
over subordinates is greater than almost any other
human relationship in our society. Care must be
taken to use this authority only to fulfill responsibilities and not to exploit or degrade subordinates.
It is important to reach out in the organization, encourage openness, listen to what subordinates have
to say, and help them establish the moral strength
to do what they believe is right. Subordinates must
be encouraged to look at options for resolving issues and to consider the ethical implications of the
situation.
Even in environments where such processes are
in place, each nurse has a personal threshold for
the burdens and sacrifices that will be tolerated,
and, therefore, there may be considerable variability among nurses. Each has to examine the tension
between obligation to the patient and to colleagues,
to the institution where they practice, and to themselves. The resulting action may be reporting to
superiors or licensing boards, using institutional
mechanisms, or in severe cases “blowing the whistle”
through disclosure to law enforcement agencies
outside of the employer’s facilities. 61 Responsible
nurse administrators should assure that nurse employees are aware of current nursing standards, the
“Code of Ethics for Nurses,” and laws governing
nursing and practices. Although the ultimate accountability for professional practice lies with the
individual nurse, nursing leadership should support and assist their staff in meeting these professional obligations. Through discussion and practice,
nurses develop a shared ethical perspective on how
to accomplish their basic purpose while following
acceptable means and giving reasonable consideration to the value and dignity of all human life.
Nurse administrators, in either the military or the
private sector, must consider questions about staffing levels, clinical competence, standards of care,
and economic efficiency as part of their routine responsibilities while they address fairness, faithfulness to duty, and commitment to the organization.
When deployed, working in austere, sometimes
dangerous, and culturally sensitive environments
adds another dimension to the challenges for military nurse administrators.
CONCLUSION
The development of military nursing in the
United States was closely associated with nursing
leaders from the private sector. Many challenges
were influenced by the social status attributed to
nursing and to women in general at that time. Following the Civil War, the strong emergence of
women from home to larger societal purpose helped
set the stage for nursing to emerge as a profession
and for trained women nurses to be included in
military organizations.
Early references to ethics in nursing centered
around morals and manners. Social etiquette was
emphasized as the first formal schools of nursing attempted to attract educated daughters from respectable middle class families. Following World War I as
more trained nurses were available to the profession,
ethics content began to shift. Definitions of nursing
ethics, as an extension of ethics, were published and
discussed as part of the nursing curriculum.
Initially, The Nightingale Pledge gained significant recognition as the code for nursing in the
United States. Organized nursing, however, proposed to establish a more formal code for the purpose of promoting ethical standards for professional
conduct. Since its inception in 1926, the “Code of
Ethics for Nurses” has periodically been revised to
remain relevant to changes in the nursing and
healthcare professions. The code serves to inform
both the nurse and society of the profession’s expectations and requirements in ethical matters. Revisions to the code, considered to be a living document, reflect changes in nursing’s relationship to
society and the societal concerns of the times.
Nursing, in general, tends toward the psychoNursing Ethics and the Military
683
logical and social meaning of life and death, health
and illness concentrating on patient advocacy and
care. The practice of medicine tends toward the disease-fighting model concentrating on the application of research and cure. Although there are distinct differences between the professions, no one on
the healthcare team functions independently of others in providing total healthcare to those being
served. The challenge is to get each to recognize
their interdependence and to collaborate in providing the most beneficial treatment and care to the
patient.
Acting in the best interest of the patient when
addressing traditional ethical questions in healthcare
and other underlying principles or values for patient care appears to be the same for all healthcare
professionals. Even the decision-making processes
nurses and physicians use in solving ethical issues
do not appear to significantly differ. The real and
important difference may be that each views the
patient and any related ethical dilemma from a combination of his or her own personal and professional
perspectives.
Although clinical ethics for nurses in the military do not differ from those in the private sector,
the overlay of wartime nursing does add professional strain and certain moral dilemmas. Even
though nurses feel pride in their contributions to
patient care in austere and sometimes dangerous
environments and the wartime role of professional
nursing, their feelings and attitudes toward armed
conflict may be forever tempered. The stress of the
experience impacts future perspectives.
Considering the complexities of today’s healthcare
environment, it is not unexpected that various providers would hold differing opinions depending on
their vantage point. Ethical dilemmas arise when
miscommunication and controversy occur among
patient, family, physician, nurses, and other healthcare professions. The ultimate goal is to bring the
individuals together as a team to resolve their issues in the best interest of the patient. The greater
the degree of collaboration between nurses and
physicians caring for the patient and family, the
easier it becomes to find resolution. Collaboration
includes mutual trust and respect, and shared decision making, responsibility, and accountability.
Continuing education to emphasize collaborative
ethical decision making is an important component
of professional development. Another is research
to extend the body of professional knowledge and
to improve practice. Adherence to ethical principles
in the conduct of research and professional practice
is essential. Incidents of incompetent, unethical, or
illegal nursing practice must be reported to the appropriate authority. Nursing leaders are responsible
for providing safe and supportive working environments that promote professional nursing practice
and mutual respect. Military nurse administrators,
as commissioned officers and professional nurses,
bear a dual responsibility to develop and sustain
the ethical climate. They must encourage subordinates to look at options for resolving issues and
consider the ethical implications of the situation.
REFERENCES
1.
Norman EM. Nurses in War: A Study of Female Military Nurses Who Served in Vietnam During the War Years 1965–
1973 [dissertation]. New York University; 1986.
2.
Feller CM, Moore CJ, eds. Highlights in the History of the Army Nurse Corps (CMH Pub 85-1). Washington, DC:
US Army Center of Military History; 1996.
3.
Hanson KS. A network of service: Female nurses in the Civil War. Caduceus. 1995;11(1):11–22.
4.
Johns E, Pfefferkorn B. The Johns Hopkins Hospital School of Nursing, 1889–1949. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins
Press; 1954.
5.
Glass LK. The Naval Reserve Corps: The first fifty years, 1908–1958. Caduceus. 1995;11:35–52.
6.
Stimson J. Untitled typewritten document found in Julia C. Stimson Papers, Box 3, File 2 (1925); US Army
Center of Military History, provided by Mary T. Sarnecky.
7.
Gretter L. Florence Nightingale Pledge: Autographed manuscript dated 1893. Am J Nurs. 1910;104:271.
8.
Freitas LF. Historical roots and future perspectives related to nursing ethics. J Prof Nurs. 1990;6(4):197–205.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
684
9.
Fowler MD. A chronicle of the evolution of the code for nurses. In: White GB, ed. Ethical Dilemmas in Contemporary Nursing Practice. Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1992: 149–154.
10.
Viens DC. A history of nursing’s code of ethics. Nurs Outlook. 1989;37(1):45–49.
11.
Smith LS. History of American military nursing. Adv Clin Care. 1991;6:31–32,36.
12.
Turin D. Communications Department, International Council of Nurses, Geneva, Switzerland, E-mail Communication, 31 May 2002.
13.
Gordon S. Life Support. Boston: Little Brown & Co; 1997: 100.
14.
Crowder L. Manners, morals, and nurses: An historical overview of nursing ethics. Texas Rep Biol Med.
1974;32:173–180.
15.
Norman EM. Women at war: The story of fifty military nurses who served in Vietnam. N J Nurse. 1992;22(2):15.
16.
Norman EM. After the casualties: Vietnam nurses’ identities and career decisions. Nurs Res. 1992;41(2):110–113.
17.
Nursing’s Social Policy Statement (NP-107 7. 5M 9/98). Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1995.
18.
The ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses (ISBN 92-95005-16-3). Geneva, Switzerland: International Council of Nurses; 2000.
19.
Code of Ethics for Nurses With Interpretive Statements (ISBN 1-55810-176-4). Washington, DC: American Nurses
Association; 2001.
20.
Ladd J. Some reflections on authority and the nurse. In: Spicker SF, Gadow S, eds. Nursing Images & Ideals. New
York: Springer Publishing Co; 1980: 160–175.
21.
Murphy CP. Introduction. In: White GB, ed. Ethical Dilemmas in Contemporary Nursing Practice. Washington,
DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1992: xxi–xxiv.
22.
Sullivan MC. Professionalism and ethics in nursing. Second Opin. 1986(1):102–119.
23.
Walker RM, Miles SH, Stocking CB, Siegler M. Physicians’ and nurses’ perceptions of ethics problems on general medical services. J Gen Intern Med. 1991;6(5):424–429.
24.
Leitch R. Personal Communication, 1997.
25.
Ortiz Quesada F, MD. Personal Communication, 1998.
26.
White GB. Philosophical ethics and nursing: A word of caution. In: Chin PL, ed. Advances in Nursing Theory
Development. Rockville, Md: Aspen; 1983: 35–46.
27.
Garritson SH. Ethical decision making patterns. J Psychosoc Nurs Ment Health Serv. 1988;26(4):22–29.
28.
Gilligan C. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1982.
29.
Cooper MC. Principle-oriented ethics and the ethic of care: A creative tension. ANS Adv Nurs Sci. 1991;14(2):22–31.
30.
Peter E, Gallop R. The ethic of care: A comparison of nursing and medical students. Image J Nurs Sch. 1994;26:47–51.
31.
Grundstein-Amado R. Differences in ethical decision-making processes among nurses and doctors. J Adv Nurs.
1992;17(2):129–137.
32.
Pike AW. Moral outrage and moral discourse in nurse–physician collaboration. J Prof Nurs. 1991;7(6):351–362.
Nursing Ethics and the Military
685
33.
The Nurses’ Role in the Care of Prisoners and Detainees. Geneva, Switzerland: International Council of Nurses; 1998.
34.
Yarling RR, McElmurry BJ. The moral foundation of nursing. ANS Adv Nurs Sci. 1986;8(2):63–73.
35.
Reeder, J, Fry S. Nurses’ Roles in Life-Sustaining Treatment Decisions. Research grant #N94-036, funded by the
Triservice Nursing Research Program, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Md.
36.
US Department of the Army. Army Medical Department Standards of Nursing Practice. Washington, DC: HQDA;
November 1981: Pamphlet 40-5.
37.
Carter BS. Medical ethics committee: A survey of Army hospitals. Mil Med. 1988;153:426–429.
38.
Scanlon C, Fleming C. Confronting ethical issues: A nursing survey. Nurs Manage. 1990;21:63–65.
39.
White GB, ed. Ethical Dilemmas in Contemporary Nursing Practice. Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1992.
40.
Code for Nurses with Interpretive Statements (G-56 7. 5M 10/96). Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1985.
41.
Smith KV. Ethical decision-making in nursing: Implications for continuing education. J Contin Educ Nurs.
1996;27(1):42–45.
42.
Carruth PJ, Carruth AK. Applying ethics to health care: The role of continuing education. Health Care Superv.
1991;10:62–68.
43.
Beam TE, Carter BS. Washington, DC: Walter Reed Army Medical Center. Memorandum, undated.
44.
Meredith NV, CDR, NC, USN, Command Ethicist, Naval Medical Center, Portsmouth, VA, Personal Communication, 11 February 1998.
45.
Nurses and Disaster Preparedness. Geneva, Switzerland: International Council of Nurses; 2001.
46.
Turner M, Colonel, Nursing Corps, US Air Force. Personal Communication, 1998.
47.
Riley J. Wired on ethics. Reflections. 1998;24(2):32.
48.
Wintz CJB. A nurse’s research dilemma. In: White GB, ed. Ethical Dilemmas in Contemporary Nursing Practice.
Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1992: 129–145.
49.
Silva M. Ethical Guidelines in the Conduct, Dissemination, and Implementation of Nursing Research (D-95 5M 5/95).
Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing; 1995.
50.
Werley HA. Army nurse participation in and contribution to research. Nurs Outlook. 1963;11:52–55.
51.
Werley HA. The different research roles in Army nursing. Nurs Outlook. 1963;11:134–136.
52.
Verhonick PJ, Werley HH. Experimentation in nursing practice in the Army. Nurs Outlook. 1963;11:204–206.
53.
Committee on Military Nursing Research. The Program for Research in Military Nursing: Progress and Future Direction. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press; 1996.
54.
Kalisch PA. Weavers of scientific patient care: Development of nursing research in the US armed forces. Nurs
Res. 1977;26(4):253–271.
55.
Committee on Military Nursing Research. Military Nursing Research: Bibliographies. Washington, DC: Institute
of Medicine, National Academy Press; 1996.
56.
Ethical Nurse Recruitment. Geneva, Switzerland: International Council of Nurses; 2001.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
686
57.
Borawaki DB. Ethical dilemmas for nurse administrators. J Nurs Adm. 1995;25:60–62.
58.
Abuse and Violence Against Nursing Personnel. Geneva, Switzerland: International Council of Nurses; 2000.
59.
Guidelines on Reporting Incompetent, Unethical, or Illegal Practices (NP-91 10M 7/94). Washington, DC: American
Nurses Publishing; 1994.
60.
Mahlmeister L. When cost-saving strategies are unacceptable. Pediatr Nurs. 1996;22(2):130–132.
61.
Rushton CH, Hogue EE. Confronting unsafe practice: Ethical and legal issues. Pediatr Nurs. 1993;19:284–288.
