Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
533
Chapter 18
MEDICAL ETHICS IN MILITARY
BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
MICHAEL E. FRISINA*
INTRODUCTION
THE NATURE OF MILITARY BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
Military Disease Hazards Research
Medical Biological Defense Research
Combat Casualty Care Research
Human Systems Technology Research
Medical Chemical Defense Research
THE ETHICAL LEGITIMACY FOR MILITARY BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
Should Military Biomedical Research Be Prohibited?
The Nonparticipation Point of View
The Participation Point of View
National Risk vs National Security
Summary
THE ETHICAL CONDUCT OF RESEARCH
Criteria for Conducting Ethically Responsible Research
Informed Consent
Is It Ethical to Conduct Research on Soldiers?
Practicality and American Moral Ideals
The Persian Gulf War Experience
The Dilemma of Choice
Summary
ETHICS AND THE ISSUE OF ANIMAL EXPERIMENTATION
The Moral Status of Animals
Animal Suffering vs the Primacy of Human Life
Application of Ethical Theory
A Definitive Rights Position
Summary
MILITARY WOMEN’S RESEARCH PROGRAM
THE PROBLEM OF EXCLUSION
CONCLUSION
*Lieutenant Colonel (Retired), Medical Service Corps, United States Army; formerly, Director, Bioethics Program, Medical Research and
Development Command, Fort Detrick, Maryland; formerly, Assistant Professor, Philosophy Division, Department of English, United States
Military Academy, West Point, New York; currently, Administrative Director, Surgical Services, Tuomey Healthcare System, 129 North
Washington Street, Sumter, South Carolina 29150
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
534
J.O. Chapin
Research Heroic–The Self-Inoculation
1944
The sixth of seven images from the series The Seven Ages of a Physician As the painting title implies, the physician-researcher,
following the ethical guidelines of research, is willing to inoculate himself in the pursuit of scientific knowledge for
the betterment of all patients.
Art: Courtesy of Novartis Pharmaceuticals.
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
535
INTRODUCTION
find, for example, no ethical objection to military
biomedical researchers vaccinating soldiers to prevent them from dying of disease. 5 Is it just as ethical for those same researchers to investigate the efficacy of chemical protective clothing, or combat
helmets and body armor with the same end in mind,
preventing harm to the soldier? This view begs a
question of whether any military biomedical research can be constructive, even vaccine research
dating to Walter Reed himself. Consequently, there
are various groups who advocate that all military
vaccine research and development be controlled by
public health agencies to preserve the constructive
nature of this research. The purpose would be to
reduce the potential for ethical conflict among researchers and to limit destructive applications of
the science. 6 Arguments for distinguishing between
offensive and defensive research will follow later
in this text.
If there is an ethical distinction between constructive (defensive) and destructive (offensive) military
biomedical research, there is a need to examine
whether this research can be conducted in an ethically responsible manner. Protection of research
subjects in military biomedical research is ethically
essential. Currently, the Department of Defense
(DoD) policy for the conduct and review of human
subjects research, which applies to all elements of
the DoD and to its contractors and grantees, upholds the protection of the fundamental rights,
welfare, and dignity of human test subjects. 5(p12)
Likewise, the DoD purports to adhere to the strictest guidelines regarding the use of animal models
in its research and development programs. 6 Animal
protocols are subjected to layers of review at various command and service levels. While the entire
subject of animal use remains under intense ethical
scrutiny, the military seeks to be sensitive to the
obligation of humane treatment of research animals
and resolute in complying with all federal requirements for their care and use in biomedical research.
Finally, a discussion of the ethical conduct of
military biomedical research needs to examine the
efforts to expand scientific studies specific to the
needs of military women. In the past, protocol designs have excluded military women for a variety
of reasons. Now it is ethically essential to understand the reasons for the past exclusion of women
and establish guidelines to alter the practices of the
past. As the roles of military women expand, they
will confront a host of new medical challenges. ReIn his preface to Principia Ethica, Moore writes,
it appears to me that in ethics, as in all other philosophical studies, the difficulties and disagreements,
of which history is full, are mainly due to a very
simple cause: namely to attempt to answer questions without first discovering precisely what question it is which you desire to answer. 1(pi)
The “precise question” of this chapter has two parts:
(1) is there an ethical justification for military biomedical research? and (2) if military biomedical research is an ethically legitimate enterprise, can military biomedical researchers conduct their work in
an ethically responsible manner?
As Moore suggests, the question of whether military biomedical research is ethically legitimate has
its own history of difficulties and disagreements.
Although there is little challenge that an ethical basis
for biomedical inquiry exists in general, the line of
distinction is extremely thin between (a) legitimate
and ethical biomedical military research and (b)
nonmedical research activity causing some researchers extreme moral anxiety over what they call, “the
militarization of the biomedical sciences.” Certain
scientists see the need to protect the benevolent
nature of biomedical science (reducing morbidity
and mortality) by maintaining complete dissociation from military-sponsored biomedical research. 2
An argument for nonparticipation, based on various sources, is the focus of a main section of this
chapter, as is a counterargument for participation
that concentrates on the first part of the question—
the moral legitimacy of military biomedical research.
By their very nature, military biomedical research
programs appear to be ethically suspect. 3 Even
though military medicine enjoys a rich history of
scientific advances in preventive medicine, the Society for Social Responsibility in Science, for example, advocates, “a tradition of personal moral
responsibility for the consequences for humanity of
professional activity…to ascertain the boundary
between constructive and destructive work.”4(pp25–
26) The idea is that military biomedical research that
is constructive, which I take to mean supports the
goals and ideals of the healing tradition of medicine, is ethically legitimate. Military biomedical research that is destructive, contributing to harming
or directly supporting the killing of human life,
would be unethical. The ethical tension derives from
trying to determine what biomedical research is
constructive and what is destructive. One might
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
536
search efforts must look to address these new challenges to preserve and maintain the health and
safety of military women.
In summary, this chapter will consider the ethical nature of military biomedical research to determine its moral legitimacy. If found to be an ethically legitimate enterprise, it then must consider the
ethical obligations and responsibilities inherent to
conducting this research. The ethical tension in the
first part of this question is profound. If there is no
inherent moral legitimacy to conducting military
biomedical research, that is to say, if all military
biomedical research is destructive in nature, then
no amount of ethical conduct, regulatory compliance, or open disclosure to the public can change
the inherent immorality of the research.
THE NATURE OF MILITARY BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
The nature of military biomedical research is
linked to the objective of conducting research and
development studies that address relevant and significant military-related problems. 7 To be militarily significant, the research and development study
must have immediate or long-range usefulness, as
distinguished from the general advancement of
knowledge of medicine. The requirement for the
research to be militarily significant stems from the
passage of the Mansfield Amendment in the 1970
military appropriations bill. The amendment required that the DoD only fund research that could
solve military problems. The intent of this legislation has been stretched in recent years with the DoD
budget containing funding for breast cancer research. Critics of the funding of military biomedical research point to this program as lacking a “direct and apparent relationship to a specific military
function or operation.”7(p78) Many scientists would
prefer to be funded from sources other than the
military and face personal ethical conflict about
whether to apply for grant money from the military.
This conflict aside for the moment, the Mansfield
Amendment does place practical and ethical limitations on military biomedical research that opens
the door to problematic, contentious, and serious
ethical issues about its nature and conduct. Consequently, to better understand the ethical issues at
stake, a brief description of the various military biomedical research programs is appropriate. Once the
nature of these programs is understood, one can
begin to determine the fundamental question of
their moral legitimacy, clarify the constructive and
destructive aspect of their applications, and develop
an ethical construct for the conduct of this research.
Currently, military biomedical research comprises five major research areas: (1) military disease
hazards research, (2) medical biological defense research, (3) combat casualty care research, (4) human
systems technology research, and (5) medical
chemical defense research. The military conducts
biomedical research and development in its own
medical research laboratories, institutes, and nongovernmental laboratories through contracts with
universities and industry. The fundamental purpose
of this research, as stated previously, is to solve
military medical problems of importance to national
defense. Each of these research areas pose a proverbial double-edged sword regarding their medical orientation thereby upholding principles of healing and preventing harm as opposed to the notion
of destructive applications of the research that
would then associate this research with nonmedical purposes. This tension is pervasive throughout
the ethical analysis of military medical research and
this discussion will return to it continually.
Military Disease Hazards Research
The major thrust of military disease hazards research includes basic and applied studies related to
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of infectious
diseases that could threaten the success of military
operations. Basic research in microbiology, immunology, pathogenesis, and vectors transmission of disease is designed to improve the technology base for
development of disease prevention, war-fighting sustainment, and treatment measures. Applied research
focuses on the development and testing of vaccines,
prophylactic and therapeutic drugs, and rapid identification and diagnostic methods and equipment.
The military human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) research program is a component of the military disease hazards research program. The goals
of this program are aimed at reducing the incidence
of new HIV infection in military populations, reducing the rate of progression from asymptomatic
to symptomatic disease, and reducing the HIV-attributable death rate. Research projects focus on
evaluating the courses of infection in military populations, identifying risk factors related to transmission, testing and evaluating vaccines for prophylaxis, and testing and evaluating drugs and vaccines
for early intervention.
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
537
Medical Biological Defense Research
The goal of medical biological defense research
is to ensure the sustained effectiveness of US military forces in a biological warfare environment by
providing medical countermeasures that deter, constrain, and defeat a biological warfare threat. Basic
research concentrates in three areas of protecting
the US military’s war-fighting capability during a
biological attack: (1) prevent casualties with medical countermeasures (vaccines, toxoids, drugs); (2)
diagnose disease (forward deployable kits, confirmation assays); and (3) implement treatment methods (antitoxins and drugs) to prevent lethality and
maximize return to duty rates.
An essential element of this program is publishing in scientific journals to maintain scientific credibility, demonstrating an open program in support
of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) treaty,
and developing an element of deterrence. The element of deterrence associated with a medical biological defense research program differs from the
concept of nuclear deterrence. In nuclear deterrence
potential adversaries basically play the old game
of “chicken” with each party to a potential conflict
threatening a retaliatory strike in the event the other
side conducts a first strike. The possibility of either
side launching an offensive strike with the opposing side capable of retaliating deters either side from
using the weapon. This concept of retaliation does
not apply to biological weapons.
The problems inherent with biological weapons
include verification (what countries have them) and
enforcing mechanisms against their development
and use (ie, the BWC ). Unlike a nuclear attack, biological agents for use as weapons are readily available. Another dissimilar factor is the capability of
terrorists to acquire and use biological agents.
Therefore, the element of deterrence in the biological arena is not one of retaliation but of defense—if
it is possible to be protected from biological agents,
then the use of those agents by an adversary has no
tactical or strategic advantage from a military perspective. Defense against biological weapons includes the need for effective international measures
of verification; international agreements against
proliferation of offensive research programs; and a
defensive research program for detection, identification, and treatment measures to decrease the military advantage and usefulness of biological warfare
agents. Specific arguments regarding the deterrence
effect of a medical biological research program will
be developed in the following section of this chapter.
Combat Casualty Care Research
The mission of combat casualty care research is
to provide integrated capabilities for medical care
and treatment of injured soldiers at all levels of care,
far forward on the battlefield, to reduce mortality
and morbidity, and effect early return of soldiers to
their military duties. Research and development are
conducted in areas of wound healing, thermal
burns, hemorrhagic shock, sepsis, organ system injury, blood preservation and blood substitutes, combat stress, and field medical materiel. Basic research
in areas of wound healing and the pathophysiological response to trauma of cellular and organ metabolism attempt to minimize mortality, lost duty
time, and unnecessary evacuation due to minor
combat trauma. Enhanced readiness to treat combat casualties focuses on developmental efforts in
surgical equipment, resuscitation fluid production
systems, and computer-assisted diagnosis and lifesupport equipment.
The ethical tension created by combat casualty
care research stems from the type of research necessary to solve the problems of the modern day
battlefield. Projectile weapons with high muzzle
velocities create different types of wounds than
those normally seen in hospital emergency rooms.
Thus, training combat surgeons on wounds created
by weapons with low muzzle velocities does not
prepare them for what they will see in combat.
Simulation with gelatin molds is inadequate in
wound healing experiments as well. Consequently,
military medical researchers have sought for years
to gain approval to study ballistic phenomena using animal models. However, to date, animal rights
groups have prevented the establishment of any
such facility. The prospect of military medical researchers shooting anesthetized, stray dogs to gain
knowledge for improving the level of care of
wounded soldiers on the battlefield was believed
to be unethical by these groups. Further discussion
of the issue of the use of animals in military medical research follows in a later section of this chapter.
Human Systems Technology Research
The purpose of human systems technology research is to enhance human capability to function
safely and effectively in military systems and operations. This research attempts to identify and
solve health problems posed by new combat materiel and new concepts for combat operations. The
results of this research help health policy makers
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
538
and combat materiel developers keep the limits of
human physiological and psychological endurance
in mind when developing new doctrine and new
military hardware. The major areas of this research
include physiology in extreme environments, biomechanical stress, operational medicine and human
performance, health effects of toxic hazards, and
non-ionizing radiation bioeffects. Program goals
seek to enhance soldiers’ performance under all
operational conditions; protect soldiers from hazards of military materiel and operations; develop
human performance models; and improve military
operations concepts, policies, and doctrine.
The central focus of human systems technology
research, like the other research areas, is preventing injury to the combat soldier. Although the aim
of this research is consistent with the goal of medicine—to sustain and enhance the quality of human
life—the potential for ethical conflict is considerable when medical researchers conduct studies that
do not focus solely on the welfare of a human being but focus also on maintaining and sustaining a
person’s physical and psychological efficiency as a
soldier—a human weapon system.
One aspect of this potential conflict concerns the
use of soldiers as human research subjects. To determine the possible deleterious effects of new military hardware on military personnel, human trials
must eventually be conducted. Historically, military
researchers have been negligent in protecting the
rights of research subjects. 8 The advent of institutional review boards (IRBs), other systematic review
procedures, and federal regulations provide the
means for protecting human subjects—even soldiers. Nonetheless, there is a tension, if not competition, between protecting the rights of research
subjects on the one hand and conducting research
that some view essential to national security interests on the other.
Medical Chemical Defense Research
The mission of medical chemical defense research
is to preserve combat effectiveness by timely provision of medical countermeasures in response to
chemical warfare defense needs. Research efforts in
this area strive to maintain the technologic capability to meet present requirements and to counter
future threats, to provide the degree of individuallevel protection and prevention to preserve the
fighting strength of combat units, and to provide
for the medical management of chemical casualties
to enhance survival and to maximize and expedite
returning soldiers to duty. Basic research includes
investigation of pharmacology, pathophysiology,
and toxicology of chemical warfare agents, pretreatment and antidote drugs, and skin decontamination
compounds to determine both their mechanisms of
action and their interaction with one another.
The ethical dilemma associated with medical
chemical defense research is the inability to conduct
human trials to demonstrate the efficacy of pretreatment or antidote drugs because to do so would
mean having to expose research subjects to actual
chemical agents. Consequently all current pretreatment and antidote drugs remain unlicensed by the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In a letter dated 30 October 1990, during Operation Desert
Shield (ODS), the deployment phase of the Persian
Gulf War, the Department of Defense applied for a
waiver to use investigational pretreatment drugs
under an investigational new drug application filed
with the FDA. 9(pp346–348) Such use, intended for therapeutic use, not research, caused an acrimonious
debate in the editorial pages of the country’s leading newspapers. The charge against the DoD was
that it was experimenting with these drugs on soldiers without their informed consent. References to
the Nazi doctors’ experiments during World War II
were elicited in statements against the approval of
the FDA waiver. Maintaining a distinction between
research and accepted medical practice is a philosophical problem that has troubled medical ethics
for a long time. The conclusion of the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of
Biomedical and Behavioral Research holds two key
factors in mapping this distinction: (1) the level of
risk, and (2) the intent of the medical professional. 8
The waiver issued by the FDA for the Persian Gulf
War did not solve the ethical problem of the military in trying to balance the rights and welfare of
its members against the military necessity of sustaining a combat ready force. Nor, for that matter,
does the criteria of level of risk and intent settle the
issue of whether a medical professional is doing
research or providing accepted medical therapy.
THE ETHICAL LEGITIMACY FOR MILITARY BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
[I]t is deemed unethical for physicians to…weaken
the physical and mental strength of a human being
without therapeutic justification [and to] employ scientific knowledge to imperil health or destroy life. 10
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
539
In examining the ethical justification for military
biomedical research, one finds that the literature on
this issue runs the gamut of political and sociological
perspectives. Views tend to be polarized ranging
from complete prohibition of any military-sponsored
biomedical research on the one hand, to secret programs that would include testing on an unwitting
and uninformed populace on the other. Both of these
extreme views are unethical positions. Complete prohibition of military medical research cannot be
morally acceptable because it results in moral evil,
namely failing to preserve the health and welfare
of soldiers deployed in combat. Secret programs
also result in moral evil and consequently are unethical. If there is any possibility of bringing these
diverging groups closer to some middle ground perhaps it is found in the quotation cited above from
the World Health Association.
Implicit in this quotation is the “do no harm”
principle. The many efforts by those opposed to
biomedical research by the military stem from their
attempt to preserve this principle—keep medical
scientific knowledge from becoming “militarized”
and used to harm rather than to heal. Ironically,
those who support military biomedical research also
base their arguments on a “firstly, do no harm” principle. The aim of military biomedical research is, in
fact, to go beyond this principle of nonmaleficence
(avoiding harm) by preserving and enhancing the
lives of those who serve the military forces of the
United States (the principle of beneficence).
The ethical tension that develops from the principle of nonmaleficence is whether the moral legitimacy of medical research, in general, applies to
military medical research. The moral legitimacy of
medical research is based on the good that results
from the research enterprise. So too, the moral legitimacy of military biomedical research must stem
from the good it produces mitigated against any
harm that is likely to result as well. Because most
medical researchers desire that their science alleviate human suffering, many are reluctant to participate in military medical research for fear that medical research is akin to weapons research in the
physical sciences and engineering. The fear that
military medical research aids in the development
of biological and chemical weapons keeps many
scientists from participating in military medical research and others calling for its complete prohibition.
The major claim of this argument is that scientists
who participate in military research fuel the arms
race. Military sponsorship of scientific research determines and influences the type of research conducted. Hence any scientist who accepts military
sponsorship is de facto working for the military, its
aims, goals, and objectives. Because military activity is antithetical to the principles of science, ethical problems exist for those scientists who participate in military-sponsored research—to include
medical research. The question to ponder is whether
those who support a military biomedical research
program and those who oppose it can stand together on the same moral high ground.
As alluded to earlier, complete dissociation from
military medical research, while eliminating any
moral problems for scientists, also risks losing the
benevolent gains in vaccines, drug therapies, and
material preventive and protective measures relevant to military problems but also to direct civilian applications of this research. For example, the
development of a number of investigational vaccines against diseases such as Venezuelan equine
encephalomyelitis (VEE), tularemia, anthrax, Q fever,
and botulism were safe and efficacious in reducing
disease from accidental exposure to laboratory
workers. The use of VEE vaccine proved useful in
eradicating the disease in horses in the epizootic in
Texas in 1971. The Rift Valley Fever vaccine was
used successfully in high-risk personnel during an
outbreak of the disease in Egypt in 1977 and 1978.
In 1989 military investigators identified an Ebolalike virus in monkeys and in 1995 military investigators were part of the World Health Organization
team to investigate the Ebola outbreak in Africa.
Since the 1950s, military medical researchers have
been investigating the Hantaan virus known to
cause the disease called Hemorrhagic Fever with
Renal Syndrome (HFRS) that has already killed
more than 50 people in the United States.
Although these research advances have direct
civilian application, the research has greatly reduced
the morbidity and mortality of military personnel.
Historically disease and nonbattle injuries have accounted for over two-thirds of the combat losses suffered by the United States in past military engagements. In Vietnam, although disease was the single
greatest cause of morbidity, the admission rate was
40% less than the Korean War due largely, in part,
to the efforts of military biomedical research and
development. 11 This point alone should be sufficient
to undermine the moral claim that complete dissociation from military medical research completely
upholds the principle of “do no harm” or eliminates
any ethical problems for medical scientists. Clearly
the loss of medical advances stated previously
would result in tremendous harm but the misuse
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
540
of this medical knowledge also presents the possibility of greater evil than the good that results from it.
Despite the possibility of consensus building
upon the “do no harm” principle, military biomedical research does present a double-edge sword.
Most often what is learned in the area of biomedical research has potential uses for both good and evil.
Clearly, in some cases, there is a distinction between
offensive (destructive) and defensive (constructive)
research. Consistent with previous discussion of the
just war doctrine, the distinction between offensive
and defensive research (and medical research is
defensive unless one views biological defense as
offensive in bioweapons development) becomes
morally important. Certainly scientists who view
their work as consistent with this doctrine are no
more unethical than soldiers who do the fighting.
Likewise, scientists who choose not to participate
are no more unethical than a pacifist or conscientious objector who would object to any participation in killing—even a just war. What is critical regardless of the path chosen by a scientist is that if
military medical research is morally legitimate, areas of scientific inquiry remain open programs and
the knowledge gained from this research cannot be
subverted by weapons designers to defeat advances
in reducing injury and disease.
Consequently, in reviewing the arguments on this
issue, three major areas of dispute emerge. First,
there is disagreement because funding is limited
and continued financing of a military program compels university and industry to accept military
projects to get much-needed research grants. As
time goes on, so it is suggested, these researchers,
having been coerced into accepting DoD money, are
compelled to work solely on military goals that may
detract, for example, from vaccine research in public health initiatives. Second, there is the argument
that the defensive (constructive and benevolent)
component of segments of the military biomedical
research programs is ambiguous enough to cause
other nations to believe that the United States is
working on offensive developments. Hence, military biomedical research could lead to a proliferation of biological and chemical weapons. Third,
there is, at a minimum, an implicit position that the
production of vaccines and drugs against devastating disease, although a laudable goal, cannot be
viewed in isolation solely for the protection of US
military forces. The production and selective use
of military biomedical advances can be viewed as a
component of strategic offensive policy that would
not benefit general populations, particularly those
of developing nations where the United States is
most likely to engage in offensive operations.
Disagreements about the funding of the scientific enterprise in the United States and how to best
achieve the goals associated with that enterprise
extend beyond military biomedical research. Those
opposed to military programs view the use of limited national resources for military purposes as
immoral. They contend that shifting of military
dollars to public health agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health, will provide the same
benefits the military program currently produces.
The difficulty with this position is that some military problems have no immediate direct impact on
public health; thus research aimed specifically at
military problems would be neglected. The economic
burden, which has a moral component, is balancing
the use of financial resources for social purposes mitigated against the needs to protect national security.
Considering the history of the development of
the atomic bomb, many scientists have come to believe that they have no control over the results of
their work when conducted under the auspices of
military funding and oversight. Their argument is
simple: The only way to control the results of one’s
work is to control what one works on in the first
place. The ambiguity related to biological defensive
versus offensive research is such that many scientists claim the only way to control proliferation of
biological weapons, for example, is to not participate in any military-sponsored biological research.
Some contend there is no distinction at all between
offensive and defensive biological research and contend the military simply mislabels offensive research as defensive to attract researchers. This argument is critical to the moral legitimacy claim of
military biomedical research and will be developed
further in this chapter.
Finally, is it possible that if the United States can
protect its military from endemic diseases in a combat zone or use technology to advance healing of
its wounded soldiers, that these medical interventions constitute contributing to the military aims of
war fighting and hence lack the moral legitimacy
of the healing arts in general? The question of the
extent to which a member of the healing profession
may participate in activities not strictly medical and
still uphold the principle of “do no harm” is an interesting and debatable one. It is, however, to ask a
different question (back to Moore again) than
whether medical professionals directly engaged in
preventing or relieving suffering of soldiers constitute direct contribution to offensive activity.
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
541
Should Military Biomedical Research Be
Prohibited?
The question of specifically prohibiting military
biomedical research is embedded in a larger argument regarding the ethics of prohibiting or limiting research. 12–15 The ethical issues at stake in this
debate are part of a spectrum of issues revolving
around fundamental decisions of scientists to participate or refuse to participate in research based
upon the perceived social consequences of their
work. The dual nature of military biomedical research fundamentally establishes this ethical conflict for researchers pondering participation in military programs. The conflict stems from a genuine
conviction that doing what can be done to enhance
the lives and well-being of members of the US military is a moral obligation—what ethicists call a
prima facie duty—one ought to do good when one
is able to do it. When taken alone, this principle is
unassailable. When juxtaposed to a competing
claim, namely, “do no harm,” these ethical principles appear in conflict. The problem then becomes
how to decide which principle carries greater
weight in the ethical decision-making process. One
method is to conduct a risk/benefit analysis to determine which action produces the greater benefits
(good) while limiting harm (evil).
There are several versions of risk and benefit arguments used by those opposed to direct involvement
of biomedical scientists in military biomedical research. 3,16,17 The forms of the arguments tend to run
from the general to the specific. One attempts to
argue that there are good reasons to limit scientific
inquiry in general and then demonstrate limiting or
restricting specific inquiry. Such arguments are persuasive only to the extent that the general argument
itself is sound in its reasoning—that the general premises are true and that the conclusion to limit or prohibit research follows from those premises. 13
Usually these types of arguments are difficult to
answer. In developing a risk/benefit ratio, the facts
needed to evaluate a premise or calculate a risk or
benefit are not known. This is not the case with
military biomedical research. It is known with a
great degree of certainty that medical research can
produce a host of preventive and therapeutic treatments that will benefit the lives of military personnel with considerable applications to the general
populace at large. The inherent risk, based on historical evidence, of the likely perversion of this research for nefarious purposes is also known. 3,6,16 The
difficulty faced in solving this problem is not a factual one but rather one of differing values and deciding how to proceed. There are honest disputes
about whether the medical advances produced by
military biomedical research are worth the possible
risk of medical scientists being exploited and the
proper end of the healing arts being perverted for
evil purposes. Hence the fundamental question
shifts from one of moral legitimacy of military medical research to one of whether the potential benefits of this research are such to pursue it, knowing
the potential for harm. In other words, can this research be conducted in such a manner as to preserve the integrity of the research? Can a system of
appropriate checks and balances be established that
will allow the conduct of research when the probability of harm resulting from the research is unknown? A review of the basic arguments is appropriate at this time.
The Nonparticipation Point of View
Those who hold that physicians should not participate in any form in military research believe that
there are three “steps” that occur in the corruption
of military medical research. These are: (1) the militarization of medicine, (2) the inevitable escalation
of biologic and chemical weaponry because of the
products of military medical research both in US
forces and the forces of any adversary, and (3) with
this escalation a violation of law, morality, and ethics. I will discuss each in turn.
Militarization
Those opposed to military biomedical research
argue against the possible offensive uses of this research. The most contentious and likely research
program for possible offensive applications is the
Medical Biological Defense Research Program. Critics contend that defensive research to protect military members from naturally occurring diseases and
biological weapons is, “highly ambiguous, provocative, and strongly suggestive of offensive goals…it
is urged that physicians refuse participation in such
research.”18(pp25–26)
Nonparticipationists document that overall funding for military programs increased by more than
400% in the late 1980s. Over the same period of time,
federal support for research in basic science issues
in the civilian sector sharply declined. 18 From 1980
to 1984, total federal research support in the United
States for life sciences decreased by 2% while DoD
funding increased by 26%. With 100 university laboMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
542
ratories participating in DoD programs with this
increased funding, nonparticipationists perceive a
trend that could alter research priorities in developing fields, such as genetic engineering. 5
Nonparticipationists also argue that military
operations can never be exclusively defensive, that
biological research is fraught with ambiguity between offensive and defensive applications and,
therefore, medical professionals who conduct research
for the military are in “ethical peril.” To strengthen
this claim, critics of the military program contend
that public funding supporting a military program
does not serve the public interest, particularly in
time of budget cutting. The nonparticipationist also
claims that the threat of disease either endemic or
as a biological weapon is overstated by the military. Further they suggest that the responsibility for
governmentally sponsored medical research for
prophylactic, protective, and other peaceful purposes in the United States belongs to the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Consequently, the NIH or CDC
should have the responsibility and, more importantly, the resources for this type of medical research. 3,16 Such a position is less likely to pervert
nature of biomedical research and, most importantly, less likely to place medical professionals in
ethical peril.
Escalation
Universal agreement exists by those opposed to
military biomedical research (within the area of
vaccine and drug development) that such research
will lead to a biological arms race analogous to the
development of nuclear weapons. 16 Although the
nonparticipationist will concede that the production of vaccines against devastating diseases is a
laudable goal, such conduct cannot be ethically
judged in isolation from the purposes of the agencies who directly supervise the research effort. It is
possible that a medical scientist might consent to,
or be misled into, work that has offensive applications under the guise of defensive work.
When the military supports large programs to
develop vaccines against exotic diseases that pose no
likely public health concern such as dengue fever,
anthrax, VEE, and numerous pathogens, one can make
informed speculations of the likely use of these pathogens as offensive weapons knowing one’s own soldiers are protected against them. Consequently this
research can be construed as a potential component
of offensive strategy that would drive likely adversaries into similar research programs and hence the
escalation of a biological arms race. Therefore,
medical scientists have the responsibility not only
to avoid working directly in ways that support offensive development, but also to act in such a way
as to avoid contributing to the arms race, even if
engaged in clearly defined defensive research.
Violation
Following from the assertion that biological
medical research by the military cannot be solely
defensive in nature, medical scientists have an obligation to not participate in research. US government policy and international agreements forbid the
development, production, and stockpiling of microbial or other biological agents, or toxins that have
no justification for prophylactic, protective, or other
peaceful purposes. Interpretation of Article I of the
Biological Weapons Convention19 (BWC) is ambiguous in that it does not preclude research into offensive agents necessary to determine what means are
required to defend against them.
Nonparticipationists contend that because the
line of distinction between offensive and defensive
research remains blurred, medical scientists violate
the spirit if not direct intent of the various agreements to avoid work that would contribute to the
development of offensive capabilities with biological agents. Opponents of military biomedical research argue that material developments in diagnostic equipment and sensor devices potentially
could produce vector delivery systems and that
antibiotic therapy could really produce means to
defeat or inhibit diagnosis, defeat current vaccine
use, or generate a novel agent.
The advocates of nonparticipation concede that
the study and production of some biological agents
(for example, toxin proteins) may have scientific
merit, but such work raises questions regarding US
compliance with the BWC. Consistent with the logic
of having the NIH conduct disease-oriented research, moving control of this type of research to
civilian agencies would dispel concern about the
offensive intent of the work, uphold the deterrent
effect of the BWC, and protect against the perversion of the healing arts in medical research.
The Participation Point of View
Those who hold that physicians should participate in military research answer the three “steps”
by (1) exploring the complexities that the militarization argument overlooks, (2) maintaining that
existing safeguards preclude inevitable escalation,
and, thus, (3) there are no violations of law, morality, or ethics. Once again, I will discuss each in turn.
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
543
Militarization
Those who advocate participating in military biomedical research reject the militarization viewpoint
as confusing the primary aims of public health research versus the national defense interests and the
health of military personnel. If the NIH, for example, were directed to accept the mission requirements of a military-oriented medical research program, this realignment of mission would hinder
NIH research in diseases of national interest. If NIH
sought to contract this research, it would be no different from the current program with the exception
of civilian control. Some scientists advocate civilian control because of a prevailing attitude of distrust of military-sponsored research. Some contend
that it is ethical to participate with the military in
times of national crisis but doubt that permanent
association has any moral imperative. Advocates of
a military program counter this claim with evidence
of the proliferation of biological warfare capabilities even by some countries who signed the BWC.
As long as activities of Third World countries remain unpredictable regarding their intentions in
offensive biological capabilities, a credible biological defense research program is needed.
This point is particularly relevant given that the
United Nations revealed in August of 1995 that Iraq
had an active offensive biological and chemical
weapons program. 20 For over 4 years, Iraq had hidden all information of a program to produce and
deploy almost 200 biological warheads—in bombs,
artillery shells, and missiles, all capable of reaching Saudi Arabia and Israel during the Persian Gulf
War. The bacterium anthrax was loaded in at least
50 bombs, and botulin—the toxin causing botulism—had been loaded into approximately 100
bombs. Additionally, Iraqi scientists grew a poisonous fungus found on peanuts and corn to produce
aflatoxin, to be used as a warfare agent. 20
Consequently, advocates of biomedical military
research contend that given examples such as Iraq,
participation by university and industry is consistent with an ethical imperative of developing the
means by which the United States can protect and
defend the lives of military personnel against a consistent threat of a potential adversary that threatens its national security.
Escalation
The participationists espouse the view that whatever potential may exist for creating offensive applications from defensive research (the escalation
factor), the possibility is extremely minute because
military biomedical research is perhaps the most
closely monitored, regulated, and inspected research that occurs within the United States. An exhaustive environmental impact review of the military program was conducted in 1989 culminating
with the publication of a final programmatic environmental impact statement (PEIS). 21 Congressional
scrutiny is applied to this program in the annual
budget review process. The military prepares resource requirements and program description and
justification in the Congressional Descriptive Summary that becomes part of the President’s budget.
The House and Senate Armed Services Committees
evaluate this program and authorize its funding.
These committees perform their own evaluations
and review of the military program prior to any final authorization and appropriation of funds. The
General Accounting Office conducts periodic reviews and hearings on the appropriateness of the
research and the use of resources consistent with
the aims and intents of the program. Special interest groups, using the Freedom of Information Act,
gain access to both research data and laboratories
on a routine basis. The public and scientific community can and do act on their own initiative to
review military research. Finally the military provides reports annually to the United Nations and
to the Biological Weapons Convention. Consequently, rather than view this research as some secret, clandestine program that could mask offensive
research or increase the paranoia of a potential adversary, participationists contend the opposite—
that a completely open program, to include publishing in peer-reviewed journals, serves a function
of deterrence (the use of an agent would have little
or no strategic or tactical military advantage) and
hence stability.
Violation
Advocates of military biomedical research demonstrate the legal aspect of their work based upon
the research conforming to regulations and standards of the following agencies: the US Department
of Agriculture, Department of Health and Human
Services, Food and Drug Administration, National
Institutes of Health, Public Health Service, Centers
for Disease Control, Department of Labor, Department of Transportation, Environmental Protection
Agency, Department of Energy, Department of
Commerce, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Proponents of military medical research contend that this research is consistent with the intent
of the BWC, particularly Article X that gives States
that are Parties to the Convention the right to parMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
544
ticipate in the fullest possible exchange of information, equipment, and materials for peaceful purposes.
Finally, regarding the alleged ambiguity of offensive and defensive research, supporters of military
biomedical research hold that there is an empirical
distinction that separates offensive from defensive
research. 17 Citing the regulatory controls over this
research, participationists contend that the likelihood of a rogue scientist developing an offensive
capability under the guise of defensive research is
highly suspect. Additionally, advocates of this research point to the historical record to substantiate
the benevolent aspect of their work—the marked
decrease in morbidity and mortality of soldiers deployed to combat zones. Participationists contend
that those who doubt the defensive intent of their
work can only talk of the potential to create offensive uses of biomedical advances or the possibility
that military could develop offensive capabilities
or future hypotheticals for offensive development.
Meanwhile, countries like Iraq continue to demonstrate a resolve to blatantly ignore international
agreement to limit the development and use of biological warfare agents, and worse, in doing so see
themselves gaining a military equalizer to imbalances of their conventional military capability. Currently, there is little evidence to support the fears
of the nonparticipationists regarding the legal aspects of military biomedical research. The ethical
concerns remain in doubt, however, regarding the
consistent application of law and ethics to military
biomedical research in the future.
National Risk vs National Security
Whether the merits of the contrasting views of
militarization, escalation, and violation are persuasive depends upon one’s first principle—the ethical
standard one holds as dominant over other principles.
To date, there is little in the professional literature
of ethics demonstrating how traditional ethical
principles apply to the dual nature of military medical professionals. Although the literature does discuss the social responsibility of medical professionals to include medical scientists, there is, in fact,
very little to clarify the competing duties of the
uniformed medical professionals to the military, to
society, and to their patients. Thus far this discussion has focused on the competing nature of the
duty of military medical professionals between their
patients and society but only from the standpoint
of preserving the ethical integrity of the healing
professions. Another aspect to consider is that military biomedical research, as beneficial as it might
be to military personnel with subsequent civilian
applications, by its nature creates significant risks
for local civilian populations and hence ought to be
prohibited. The solution to this vexing problem again
hinges upon some kind of risk and benefit analysis.
Dispute currently exists about what risks are
worth taking when pursuing research. These risks
include potential harm to research subjects, nonresearch subjects, and the researchers themselves.
Identifying risks to research subjects (participants)
requires formulating risk and benefit equations as
discussed previously. These risks are different from
the kind that populations at large face from potential accidents or sabotage. Furthermore, the public
has demonstrated resolve to protect itself from such
risks. 22–25 Based on the principle of justice, current
ethical practices in research require a fair and equitable distribution of burdens and benefits. When the
issues of human subject research in the military are
in question, if the risks are disproportionate to the
benefits then there would be grounds to ethically suspect the conduct of the research.
Risks to nonresearch participants include the issue of public safety. Several aspects of military
medical research, particularly in the area of infectious disease, pose at a minimum a potential public health threat in the event of a laboratory accident. The issue of public safety revolves around the
idea of real versus perceived threat that the research
poses to public health. Nonetheless, there have been
several challenges to military medical research
projects being conducted at university labs as well
as government facilities. How much risk is ethically
acceptable must be mitigated against the potential
harm to an unsuspecting or, worse, uninformed local population. Finally, there is also the question of
how much risk is acceptable for the researchers
themselves. For example, should a lab worker working with virulent anthracic cells drop the flask containing the cells on the floor, the infected lab worker
could be treated with penicillin. The spill would be
treated with chlorine bleach that would kill the cells.
Hence, the issue of public risk versus military benefit is mitigated by the ability to conduct risk and
benefit analysis.
Having said all this, the general principle of prohibiting research that poses unacceptable risk (and
the operative word is unacceptable) has merit. There
is a trade-off regarding the perceived risks and the
reasonable precautions or likelihood of there being
a real threat to a community, particularly from military biomedical research. Currently, all biomedical
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
545
research protocols conducted by the military undergo intense scrutiny at all levels of institutional
review for scientific merit, protection of research
subjects, and safety. The application of the risk principle applies to the entire research community, not
just the military. 26 Consequently, the question becomes one not about the moral legitimacy of military biomedical research but one of inherent risks,
in magnitude far greater than civilian research so
as to limit or prohibit its conduct.
Summary
There seems to be a prevailing attitude among
certain scientific circles that if the military is funding research, there must inherently be something
nefarious about its conduct. The military has contributed to this perception in the past by conducting
unethical research. The lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD) studies (which were discussed in detail in
Chapter 17, The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and
Deceptive American Medical Experimentation) for
example, are clearly unethical judged by the standards of the day regarding the lack of informed
consent from research subjects. Even though these
experiments were not medical protocols, military
medical research tends to be painted with the same
broad brush of suspicion based upon a lapse of ethical judgment from the past.
There is a line, be it distinct or vague, between
justifiable and unjustifiable biomedical research and
the use of these data for purposes that violate the
integrity of the medical community. Such a possibility exists for all medical data, not just data from
military medical research. 27,28 More problematic are
those protocols designed in other than biomedical
programs that require the participation of medical
personnel to validate the data. For example, while
enhancing the lethality of a particular weapon, developers may request the participation of biomedical personnel to verify the lethal or nonlethal aspects
of the weapon. This is the case with recent studies
in the development of nonlethal microwave weapon
technology that has a lethal capability. Such an example poses a more vexing issue for the biomedical researcher who may be participating in research
that has no benevolent goal, even if one argues that
a nonlethal incapacitating weapon is benevolent
versus a lethal weapon. Using medical knowledge for
the purpose of causing harm, for instance to validate that a particular weapon has capacity to kill
or maim in order to increase the capacity of that
weapon to do so, is simply the wrong use of medicine and medical research, because it turns the
medical researcher into a weapons developer. Furthermore, such an example clearly demonstrates the
point regarding the issue of social responsibility and
the consequences of research. No person, operating in any capacity, ought to be compelled to act in
such a way as to violate personal conscience or moral
obligations. Nor should medical professionals use
medical knowledge for the expressed purpose of
endangering or destroying life.
Indeed, there are two parallel issues that emerge
regarding the ethical legitimacy of biomedical research. Returning to the principle of “do no harm,”
there is a distinction to be made between research that
has benevolent ends and research that has nonbenevolent ends. Medical professionals ought to stay in
the business of healing and not hurting, which includes not participating in or contributing to weapons research and development. However, there is
also a need to establish a clear distinction between
offensive and defensive goals within the realm of
biomedical military research. Even though this is
not an ideal world, preserving the ethical integrity
of biomedical research and providing for the welfare of military personnel ought not be competing
or mutually exclusive goals. Both can be done and
both should be done.
THE ETHICAL CONDUCT OF RESEARCH
“Research is a complicated activity in which it is
easy for well-meaning investigators to overlook the
interests of research participants—to the detriment of
the participants, scientists, science, and society.”29(p1)
Upholding the ethical principles of biomedical research is part of the intricacies of the entire research
enterprise. The breaches of ethical principles, be
they intentional or unintentional, are replete in the
historical literature. 30–34 From the Nazi doctors (discussed in Chapters 14 and 15 in this volume) to the
infamous Tuskegee syphilis studies and the more
recent revelations of radiation studies conducted by
the US Department of Energy (discussed in Chapter 17 of this volume), breaches in conduct exist.
Such conduct has led to the promulgation of the
Nuremberg Code, The Declaration of Helsinki, the
Belmont Report, and a host of federal regulations
in an attempt to provide clear guidelines regarding
the ethical conduct of biomedical research.
These efforts notwithstanding, while scientific
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
546
research continues to produce substantial social
benefits, it continues to pose vexing ethical questions regarding the protection of human subjects,
the use of nonhuman animals, and expanding study
populations to include women and minority groups.
Military biomedical research is not immune to these
questions. Hence there is a need to consider how
each of these issues impact, in an ethical sense, the
conduct of biomedical research in the military.
Criteria for Conducting Ethically Responsible
Research
The National Commission for the Protection of
Human Subjects in Biomedical and Behavioral Research conducted hearings on the ethical problems
in human research from 1974 to 1977. The mission
of this panel as outlined in its summary statement,
was, in part, to
conduct a comprehensive investigation and study
to identify the basic ethical principles that should
underlie the conduct of biomedical and behavioral
research involving human subjects. 8
The recommendations of the panel were later codified into public law. 35 The fruit of the National
Commission’s labor appears in The Belmont Report. 8
The three basic principles, intended as succinct
guidelines to govern the use of human subjects in
research, include8(PartB):
1.
Beneficence: maximize the good outcomes
while avoiding or minimizing unnecessary
risk, harm, or wrong;
2.
Respect: protect the autonomy of persons,
with courtesy and respect for individuals as
persons (as ends in themselves and not mere
means); and
3.
Justice: ensuring reasonable, nonexploitive,
and carefully considered procedures and their
fair administration—fair distribution of risks
and benefits among persons and groups.
These three principles are the foundation for the
following six norms that govern the ethical conduct
of research29(p19):
1.
Valid research design: valid design yields correct results taking into account relevant
theory, methods, and prior studies;
2.
Competence of the researcher: the investigator must be capable of conducting various
procedures in a valid manner;
3.
Identification of consequences: a risks and
benefits analysis must be conducted. Ethical
research adjusts procedures to ensure privacy,
confidentiality, minimized risks, and maximized benefits;
4.
Selection of subjects: the subjects must be appropriate for the purposes of the study, representative of those who will benefit from the
research, and appropriate in number;
5.
Voluntary informed consent: voluntary
means freely, without threat or inducement.
Informed means the subject knows what a
reasonable person in the same situation
would want to know prior to granting consent. Consent means an explicit agreement to
participate; and
6.
Compensation for injury: the researcher is responsible for what happens to a research subject. Federal law requires that subjects be informed regarding compensation for injury,
but the law does not require compensation.
The application of the general principles and
norms stated above often narrow specifically to
three fundamental requirements: (1) informed consent, (2) risk and benefit assessment, and (3) the
selection of subjects of research. Of these three areas,
informed consent (deriving from the Nuremberg
Code, 1947) is the most contentious regarding the
use of soldiers as subjects in research. Why is informed consent important? What does it entail? Is
consent different from mere approval? The answers
to these questions are found in the federal regulations written to address these situations.
Informed Consent
Although the importance of informed consent is
generally unquestioned,36,37 there is controversy
over whether it is possible to actually obtain truly
informed consent from a research participant. General agreement exists regarding the three basic elements in the consent process: (1) information, (2)
understanding, and (3) voluntariness. The aspect
of information requires full disclosure by the investigator including a statement of the purpose of the
research, description of foreseeable risks and discomfort, description of benefits, a disclosure of alternative procedures, statement regarding confidentiality of the records, explanation of compensation
and medical treatment for injuries resulting from
participation, a point of contact regarding the rights
of the research volunteer, a statement regarding the
voluntary nature of the participant, and any addiMedical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
547
tional information regarding the findings of the research, withdrawal criteria, or circumstances by
which the investigator can terminate the participation of the research volunteer.
How well a research subject understands or comprehends information relevant to the research is
dependent upon a number of factors. Because comprehension is often a matter of how the investigator conveys information to the research volunteer,
the investigator needs to tailor the informed consent process to each individual based upon the
subject’s intelligence, maturity, language level, and
other special aspects of the participant. If necessary,
a third party is part of the process to assess the understanding of the research participant. Printing
consent forms in the native language of the subject
may be necessary as well as providing interpretation for those subjects who may not be able to read
the consent form. On the face of it, using a subject
who cannot read a consent form sounds, in and of
itself, ethically suspect. Such practice is acceptable
regarding children and may be acceptable in other
instances as well. The key component is the aspect
of comprehension. Regardless of how the information is conveyed and the level of comprehension
obtained, investigators are responsible for ensuring
that the subject comprehends all the information.
The aspect of voluntariness of consent that differs from mere approval is the element of rights
conveyed upon the volunteer in the consent process. This element requires conditions free from
coercion and undue influence.
Coercion occurs when an overt threat of harm is
intentionally presented by one person to another
in order to obtain compliance. Undue influence, by
contrast, occurs through an offer of an excessive,
unwarranted, inappropriate or improper reward or
other overture in order to obtain compliance. 8(PartC)
Perhaps the least understood aspect of gaining informed consent is the communication process that
takes place between the investigator and the research
subject. Failing to understand the nuances of body
language, general attitude and friendliness, or general empathy for the research subject are some factors that can contribute to the perception of coercion.
The aspect of voluntariness is absolute concerning informed consent in the same way that informed
consent is absolute to the conduct of ethical research. Consequently it is reasonable to ask whether
soldiers can ever provide true voluntary consent.
The aspect of coercion is problematic in that an element of coercion tends to exist in research on a sliding scale. That is to say that some element of incentive exists for subjects to participate in research. At
some juncture the potential exists to cross the line
from benefits and appropriate incentives to deception and coercion. If this aspect of “mitigated coercion” associated with medical research cannot be
justified, then the use of soldiers in biomedical research is unethical.
Is It Ethical to Conduct Research on Soldiers?
There are several issues at stake in what amounts
to the fundamental question of this section. First,
and perhaps foremost, is the issue of the ethical status of soldiers. When a person joins the military,
the individual incurs unique obligations to the
country and to other service members. These obligations cause a shift in the ranking of usually applicable ethical priorities. By joining the military,
individuals implicitly agree to subordinate their
autonomy for the sake of accomplishing the military mission. Service members also agree, implicitly, to risk personal injury or loss of life if need be
in compliance with lawful orders of their superiors. This implicit consent applies not only in direct
warfare but in preparations for war as well. Nonetheless, even though service members voluntarily
allow themselves to be treated as a means in some
instances, the military has an obligation to protect
the interests and welfare of soldiers consistent with
accomplishing the military mission. The extent to
which this reciprocal relationship functions varies
in times of peace and war, and the willingness to
protect the autonomy of soldiers is mitigated in direct proportion to the perceived threat to national
interests.
Although service members subordinate autonomy
relative to accomplishing a wartime mission, this
does not mean that individual autonomy should be
compromised regarding medical research—even
medical research that has direct impact on soldiers
and the military mission. With regard to medical
research, soldiers are still entitled to full autonomy
and due the requisite consideration regarding their
use in research as that provided to civilians. Consequently, the DoD policy for the conduct and review of human subjects research, which applies to
all elements of the DoD and its contractors and grantees, “requires that the fundamental rights, welfare,
and dignity of human subjects in DoD-supported
research be protected to the maximum extent possible, and establishes this as a responsibility of the
military chain of command.”38(p9)
The Department of Defense adheres to all protections established by the federal government to
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
548
include: Department of Defense 32 CFR 219; Department of Health and Human Services 45 CFR 46; the
Food and Drug Administration 21 CFR 50 and 56;
and Department of Defense 10 USC 980, which requires: (a) the informed consent of the subject in
advance; or (b) in the case of research intended to
be beneficial to the subject, the informed consent
of the subject or legal representative of the subject
is obtained in advance. In essence, if an individual
cannot give his or her own consent, investigators
cannot enroll the person into a nontherapeutic (ie,
of no benefit to the subject) study. Quite simply, the
answer is “no” to the question “Are there ethical
exceptions for military medical research?” concerning the corpus of historical and contemporary
guidelines of medical research (levels of risk,
voluntariness, informed consent).
As straightforward as this analysis seems to be,
given the DoD’s own stated policy, there is still considerable concern over the application of these standards particularly in the area of informed consent.
There are those who may argue that given the coercive nature of the military, soldiers are incapable of
providing voluntary consent in the purest sense of
the term. If this is the case, and unless there are justifiable exceptions to the ethical criteria for military
medical research, then it would be unethical to use
soldiers as research subjects. Is it necessarily true
that simply because the military is inherently coercive that soldiers lose their autonomy and hence the
ability to provide voluntary informed consent?
First, it is necessary to understand that soldiers
have the desire to participate in military biomedical research. In fact, some soldiers volunteer to be
part of a unique program designated specifically
for use as research volunteers. 39 These soldiers are
recruited directly from their advanced individual
training programs for the sole purpose of volunteering for various biomedical research protocols.
Even though these soldiers need never volunteer
for a study during their tour of duty with the Military Research Volunteer Program, their mere participation makes them vulnerable to exploitation
and the military needs to guard against the potential for abuse. Nonetheless, many soldiers do volunteer by choice for a variety of studies based on
the written protocol that describes the research
methodology and possible side effects of the study.
More importantly, these soldiers may withdraw
from any study, at any time, without fear of reprisal
from their superiors or the investigators.
For many of these soldiers, participating in medical research is a matter of pride and the self-satisfaction of knowing they are making a unique contribution to the welfare of other soldiers. Many see
their efforts as a unique sacrifice and service to their
country, and these soldiers view their participation
as voluntary. The military maintains a database of
the names of all its test subjects participating in
greater-than-minimal-risk studies for 75 years. The
requirements of the protocol approval process for DoD
biomedical research preserves the key aspects of autonomy and informed consent in times of peace and
war. Consequently it appears that these individuals
voluntarily concede their autonomy by virtue of being in the military, that such concession of autonomy
is justifiable, and the spirit as well as the intent of the
informed consent process is not compromised.
Practicality and American Moral Ideals
The voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential. This means that the person involved should have legal capacity to give consent;
should be so situated as to be able to exercise the
free power of choice, without the intervention of
any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, overreaching, or other ulterior form of constraint or
coercion; and should have sufficient knowledge
and comprehension of the elements of the subject
matter involved as to enable him to make an understanding and enlightened decision.…The duty
and responsibility for ascertaining the quality of
the consent rests upon each individual who initiates, directs or engages in the experiment. It is a
personal duty and responsibility which may not be
delegated to another with impunity. 40(Art1)
The Nuremberg Code makes no distinction between peacetime and the exigencies of war regarding the requirement for informed consent of an individual prior to participating in research. This
point is particularly troubling given the findings of
the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments,41 a panel created by the Clinton Administration to investigate reports of unethical and possibly life-threatening experimentation on human
subjects. The Committee discovered that tens of
thousands of service members were exposed to radiation in research without their consent.
The examples of the radiation research42 and the
infamous LSD43 studies occurred prior to the rigorous screening and protocol review process of today.
Moral hindsight allows the privilege of criticizing
and, when necessary, condemning immoral practices of the past. Nonetheless, the radiation experiments and LSD studies conducted on military personnel without their informed consent did occur
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
549
after the adoption of the Nuremberg Code of 1947
and the top-secret rules adopted by the DoD in
1953,44 which required researchers to inform human
subjects of health risks associated with radioactive,
chemical, and biological warfare experiments. 45
There is no ambiguity in the requirements of the
Nuremberg Code regarding voluntary consent.
Consequently, the researchers involved in these
protocols failed in their duties and responsibilities
owed to the victims of their research.
As disturbing as these examples appear regarding
the outright disregard for the rules and guidelines
of human research, they are clearly distinguishable
from the more perplexing problem of trying to draw
distinctions between medical research and medical
practice and the need to determine whether military personnel have been treated as uninformed
research subjects. The advances in medical technology and therapeutic treatments have blurred the
distinction between therapy and research. This
fuzzy line of demarcation applies in the military and
has potential for ethical conflict as one seeks to protect the rights of military personnel from unethical
practices regarding their use as human subjects.
The Persian Gulf War Experience
The history of research with soldiers demonstrates a prevailing attitude that when a threat to
the nation’s security appears imminent (as was the
case of nuclear war in the 1950s and the fear of lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD] use on American
personnel in the 1960s), the requirements of informed consent and review approval represent impediments to national security—the urgency of the
situation demands the conduct of these studies.
Such a rationale has been used to justify egregious
abuses of autonomy and respect for human welfare
in clear cases of research when such a defense is
unjustifiable.
The Persian Gulf War added a new dimension to
the issue of protecting military members not only
from abuses of research mentioned previously but
from the imminent prospect of facing chemical and
biological weapons. Chemical weapons comprise a
broad spectrum of devices that include lethal agents
(nerve, blood, blister, and phosgene), incapacitating agents (so-called tear gas agents), smoke, and
herbicides. Nerve agents, a particular threat from
the Iraqi arsenal, attack a person through the skin
inhibiting the action of the enzyme cholinesterase.
Inhibition of cholinesterase causes violent muscle
contraction in the victim with death resulting from
asphyxiation. Additionally, Iraq was known to have
an arsenal of biological weapons that work by
spreading disease. Anthrax and botulism are typical biological agents that can be delivered on the
battlefield by bombs, missiles, and rockets.
Prior to commencing Operation Desert Storm
(ODS), the combat phase of the Persian Gulf War,
the DoD sought and obtained a one-time waiver of
informed consent requirements (known as Rule
23[d]) for the use of investigational drugs and vaccines on American forces serving in the Persian
Gulf. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
defines investigational drugs as those not approved
for use by the general public. Until 1987, the use of
investigational agents was permitted solely for research purposes. The FDA modified this rule approving the use of investigational agents to treat
life-threatening conditions where no comparable
drug or therapy is available. Changes not withstanding, the FDA requires physicians to obtain a
patient’s informed consent before using an investigational drug for therapy. 46 In persuading the FDA
to waive their requirements on the use of investigational agents, the DoD argued that in the exigencies of war obtaining solders’ informed consent was
“not feasible.”47 This case study highlights many
issues, the least of which includes where to draw
the line between medical practice and medical research. The FDA approval of the informed consent
waiver rekindled discussion of how to make a distinction between therapy and research but also
raised the specter of the Nazi doctors—namely, did
the DoD make guinea pigs out of US military personnel serving in the Persian Gulf War?48–52
There are two basic positions regarding the use
of investigational drugs and the informed consent
waiver approval as it applied to military members
during the Persian Gulf War. The major point of contention hinges on whether the use of investigational
agents by the military in this one-time occurrence
constitutes medical research or medical treatment.
Presumably if the intended use is for research, the
waiver is unethical as opposed to medical treatment
where the exigencies of war provide justification to
waiving consent with the purpose of protecting soldiers from chemical and biological weapons.
The Research Point of View
The first position contends that the military intent for using investigational agents was to conduct
medical research. Consequently, the Nuremberg
Code would prohibit the use of these drugs on solMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
550
diers who did not provide informed consent. More
recently, the Department of Defense Authorization
Act (1985) also prohibits the military from conducting research on humans unless it has obtained the
informed consent of the subject in advance. This
prohibition even extends to research intended to be
beneficial to the subject. Consequently, those who
hold this position view the waiver of informed consent as patently unethical. A moderated position of
this view concedes the intent of the military as one
of medical practice but insists that in the use of investigational agents, even when there is evidence
that a derived benefit from their use exists, such a
benefit does not automatically transform what is
experimental into therapy. If this were the case, then
the informed consent process could simply be circumvented by redefining these activities. In either
case, the argument upholds the absolute of informed consent in research activities. Advocates of
this view believe the use of investigational agents
constitutes research. Therefore, the use of these agents
with a waiver of informed consent is unethical.
The Practice Point of View
Those who condone the waiver of informed consent articulate a position that argues the use of investigational agents as a preventive treatment against
biological and chemical weapons is not medical research. The DoD was attempting to use these agents
in what was considered an immediate “life-threatening” situation to protect the lives of military
members from the effects of biological and chemical weapons. This use is within the scope of the US
Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) regulation
on investigational drugs. 53 The principle of preventing unnecessary harm (nonmaleficence) to military
members overrides all other principles in this view,
even the prerogative of soldiers to make their own
decisions regarding medical treatment (autonomy).
Because the use of these agents was intended as a
preventive therapy and not research, and because
the military already has precedent to impose medical therapies on military members to ensure mission accomplishment, the action regarding the use
of investigational agents in this context was not
viewed as unethical by the FDA or DoD leadership.
The Distinction Between Research and Practice
The Persian Gulf War example provided the opportunity to examine the conceptual distinction
between medical research and medical practice. The
Belmont Report addresses this issue and is the starting point for this discussion. According to the Report, the term practice refers
to interventions that are designed solely to enhance
the well-being of an individual patient or client and
that have a reasonable expectation of success. The
purpose of medical or behavioral practice is to provide diagnosis, preventive treatment or therapy to
particular individuals. 8(PartA)
The term research, by contrast,
designates an activity designed to test an hypothesis, permit conclusions to be drawn, and thereby
to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge (expressed, for example, in theories, principles, and statements of relationships). 8(PartA)
The Report goes on to further clarify departures by
physicians from standard or accepted practice, but
such departures from standard practice do not, of
themselves, constitute research.
The fact that a procedure is “experimental,” in the
sense of new, untested or different, does not automatically place it in the category of research. 8(PartA)
The use of investigational agents by the DoD for
preventive treatment against biological and chemical warfare agents was new and untested. One of
the agents, pyridostigmine bromide (PB), is approved by the FDA for therapeutic use for a different purpose than as a pretreatment chemical agent
antidote. Consequently, the DoD was compelled by
law to file a new investigational drug application
for an already approved FDA drug. FDA approval
requires safety and efficacy testing in both animals
and humans. Safety and efficacy data exist in animal studies for PB use as a chemical agent pretreatment. Only safety data exist for this use in humans
because efficacy testing would require exposing
human subjects to a nerve agent. This activity is
unethical under existing human use review board
standards. Therefore, the FDA cannot grant complete licensure for the use of this drug as a chemical nerve agent pretreatment.
At this juncture the issue becomes how to gain
approval to use these investigational agents even
though they lack full approval status. Having conducted risk-benefit analysis, given the best intelligence data regarding the Iraqi intent to use biological and chemical weapons, and lacking any current
pretreatment standard of care for exposure to nerve
agents, soldiers faced a greater risk from these
weapons unprotected than they did from receiving
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
551
the investigational drugs. Now the issue shifts to
the appropriateness of requiring soldiers to take
drugs known to be safe without the option of informed consent. The military could have allowed
soldiers to take these drugs voluntarily. The DoD
argued, however, that to allow soldiers to refuse to
take the drugs would needlessly risk their lives and
the lives of their protected compatriots:
Our planning for Desert Shield contingencies has
convinced us that another circumstance should be
recognized in the FDA regulation in which it would
be consistent with the statute and ethically appropriate for medical professionals to “deem it not feasible” to obtain informed consent of the patient—
that circumstance being the existence of military
combat exigencies, coupled with a determination
that the use of the product is in the best interest of
the individual. By the term “military combat exigencies,” we mean military combat (actual or
threatened) circumstances in which the health of
the individual, the safety of other personnel and
the accomplishment of the military mission require
that a particular treatment be provided to a specified
group of military personnel, without regard to what
might be any individual’s personal preference for no
treatment or for some alternative treatment. 47
The Dilemma of Choice
Earlier in this discussion the conclusion was drawn
that there are no exceptions to the right of informed
consent to participate in research. One can argue
that even the use of a new, unproved therapy should
not be imposed on soldiers without their consent. Can
the Persian Gulf War example—the use of unproved
therapy (given it is consistent with the criteria of
The Belmont Report)—provide a qualified exception
in the context of actual or threatened combat?
The basic responsibility of the FDA is to protect
the American public (to include military members)
from unsafe and ineffective drugs. A problem arises
when a drug passes safety testing but criteria for
testing efficacy are beyond the bounds of ethical
conduct. Which is more harmful: (a) to withhold the
potential benefit or (b) risk facing the life-threatening situation without protection? One might readily
answer that no protection produces a greater risk.
Does that mean that the use of the drug is required
or should soldiers be allowed to choose voluntarily? The answer to this question depends upon
whether military members have a duty to subordinate individual self-interest for the good of the
many. The success of a military mission depends
upon unit cohesion, trust, and interdependence of
unit members. Military units spend countless hours
training and preparing for their wartime missions.
The success of small unit tactics depends upon unit
members being able to perform their assigned tasks
when called upon to do so. Unprotected soldiers
suffering injury from chemical and biological agents
become liabilities to the welfare of their unit members when they are unable to perform their assigned
role. Ultimately, the success of the overall mission is
potentially jeopardized. If there is a derived benefit
from taking these investigational agents and some
members fail to accept this benefit, the negative effects of biological and chemical weapons not only
impacts on those members not protected but degrades the capability of the entire unit and ultimately
the welfare of the other unit members. Although
some may argue that requiring military personnel
to sacrifice their autonomy is morally indefensible,
such a sacrifice has justification based on the principle of duty.
Summary
The protection of military personnel from the
inherent risks of medical research and from innovative, new, and unproved practice is of paramount
importance. Those who serve in defense of their
country have a heightened sense of duty to their
comrades-in-arms and to the nation. Those who
exercise command authority over military personnel have an obligation to protect the rights, dignity,
and autonomy of their subordinates to the extent
possible without jeopardizing the military mission
or the welfare of military personnel as a whole.
There exists an ethical framework and criteria by
which medical research can be conducted that preserves the ethical status of military members. Military personnel have the prerogative to volunteer for
research and to deny them this privilege can potentially violate their personal autonomy. The experience in the Persian Gulf War and Rule 23(d) illustrates
the difficulty of making choices that satisfy the demands of competing ethical principles and the potential for blurring the distinction between research
and therapy. Significant to the Persian Gulf War is
the need to acknowledge the risk associated with
the use of unproved therapies. When the DoD finds
it necessary to seek another waiver for the use of
investigational agents in times of war, careful and
comprehensive study of military members who take
these agents is a moral imperative. The mysteries
of Gulf War illnesses suggest that the military
should do a better job of obtaining information regarding side effects and illness that may stem from
the agents themselves or effects of the agents comMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
552
bined with unique environmental exposures and
stress of the battlefield. Simply stated, the military
needs to devise a more effective method for recording and sorting medical information on the battlefield,
particularly when it requires waivers from standard
legal and ethical practices in medical research or
therapy. This point suggests that if exceptions to established practices to informed consent exist, and
military personnel later suffer from medical conditions linked to the use of investigational agents administered without informed consent, then they
ought to receive just compensation and the record trail
to support such claims ought to be available, exigencies of combat notwithstanding.
ETHICS AND THE ISSUE OF ANIMAL EXPERIMENTATION
More than the other topics of this chapter, the
use of animals in research is as much a social and
political question as it is a philosophical one. With
few exceptions the voices in this debate are volatile
and intractable, expressing virtually no hope of
reaching common ground or compromise. Consequently it is imperative to examine the arguments
with the intent of gaining understanding of the ethical stakes from both sides of this debate.
There exists the presumption that most people
want to “do the right thing” regarding actions to
fellow humans and nonhuman animals. With this
presumption comes the recognition of the value of
biomedical research in advancing cures, treatments,
and prophylaxis enhancing quality of life (even
though some opposed to animal research deny such
value). Value is ascribed to medical research because
of the good that it adds to human life. Advocates of
animal research support its practice because they
view the value of human life greater than nonhuman animal life. One can hold this position without denying that nonhuman animal life has value,
only that human life has greater value. As a society, however, the United States is becoming more
ambivalent over the use of animals to gain medical
advances at the expense of nonhuman animals, using
lower animal life models or computer modeling as
alternatives. The source of this ambivalence may stem
from emotionally charged rhetoric, or the desire to
be more sensitive to creatures who can experience
pain, suffering, and lost preferences, or possibly a
paradigm shift of viewing nature as a cosmic unity.
This ambivalence might also stem from the realization that a concept of speciesism is valid in regard
to the treatment of nonhuman animals, pricking
moral consciousness beyond caring about the welfare of animals to affording them rights.
The Moral Status of Animals
The position one chooses to embrace regarding
the use of animals in research derives from whether
or not one has a fundamental belief in the moral
equality and rights of animals. 54,55 The moral equality position advocates rights in the sense of human
rights where it follows that the use of animals by
humans constitutes a moral wrong. The logical
starting point to determine whether it is ethical to
use animals in research begins by determining
whether it is ethical for humans to use animals for
any purpose. Many critics of animal research assert
the right of nonhuman animals to be treated as ends
in themselves. If one holds the position that it is
wrong for humans to use animals for any purpose
then there is no moral distinction to make between
justifiable and unjustifiable use of nonhuman animals in research. There is no middle ground, no
basis for mediation, no common principle by which
antagonists in this debate can reach consensus.
Logical consistency demands that using animals for
food, clothing, sport, entertainment, and education
also violates the so-called rights of animals. If, however, one concedes that not all uses of animals for
human needs are unethical, the debate narrows as
to why using animals in research is morally wrong
but other uses are morally permissible.
Animal Suffering vs the Primacy of Human Life
One might easily suggest, as many do, that the
main problem with using animals in research is the
suffering inflicted upon them. 56 Advocates for animal rights have framed the antivivisection debate
as one depicting all animal research as cruel, unnecessary, and unscientific as opposed to distinguishing between the humane and inhumane use
of animals. Hence the fundamental value argument
in this context places the research community in a
position of upholding the primacy of human life
over animal life. If animals have moral equality with
humans then one cannot help but question, as do
many who favor vivisection, as to the matter of priority when defending the rights of animals on the
issue of suffering. For example, the use of animals
for food and clothing probably exceeds biomedical
research by higher than a thousand-fold. FurtherMedical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
553
more, the majority of animals used in research are
mice and rats. This dichotomy or, less charitably,
logical contradiction has led many people to conclude that animal research is merely a target of opportunity—an issue easily isolated from mainstream animal use, namely hunting, domestic pets,
and the food and clothing industries.
It is not possible to conclude, however, from the
preceding discussion that the use of animals in research and related suffering they might incur, is
automatically justifiable simply because their use
for other purposes is condoned. Many animals have
“expressed preferences” and the ability to pursue
those preferences. Consequently animals should not
be treated as mere objects. Animal lives count for
something as does their ability to feel pain and to
suffer. On balance one has to consider whether the
pain an animal might experience in research is justified given the magnitude of benefit derived. Hence
one returns to the question at hand: Are humans
ethically justified in the use of animals either in
general or specific instances, and if so, what ethical
obligations apply to researchers who use nonhuman
animals in their research? Surprisingly, there appears to be no consensus among philosophers in
applying ethical theories to answer these questions.
There is indication, however, that even arguments
for complete abolition of animal research do not
completely exclude exceptions for valuing human
life as greater than nonhuman animal life. 57
Application of Ethical Theory
The major ethical theories are versions of (a) teleological or consequentialist views—the basic
theory of this type is generally known as classic
utilitarianism or (b) deontological views focusing
on the inherent rightness or wrongness of an action irrespective of the good (bad) consequences
that result from doing an action. Closely akin to the
deontological view is the rights-based account of
moral obligation that emphasizes the notion of respect and justice that reflect upon a particular moral
judgment as right or wrong. Finally the contractarian
view espouses ethical obligations forged from mutual agreement of consenting parties who function
as moral agents.
The animal rights’ proponent fundamentally
opposes the use of animals by humans based on the
belief that animals have inherent value. If animals
have inherent value (moral equality), then regardless of the good humans can derive from their use,
it is morally impermissible to violate the rights of
animals that derive from their inherent moral worth.
This argument requires a conceptual definition of
inherent value. Antivivisectionists conceive (in
minimal properties) sentience, purposiveness, and
the capacity to feel pain to be sufficient to afford
animals moral status. One criticism of these criteria is that they are not sufficient. The necessary trait
to confer moral status on a living entity is moral
autonomy—the capacity to make moral choices.
Because this trait is lacking in nonhuman animals
they deserve less or no moral consideration. One
attacks this criticism by pointing out that humans
lack, at various times, the capacity to function as
moral agents (ie, a baby; a senile, demented, or retarded person; a comatose patient) yet their moral
value is still regarded. Likewise sentient animals
should be afforded equal consideration and their
well-being should not be disrupted. 58
If this argument is sound (if its premises are true
and the conclusion follows from the premises), then
humans incur fundamental duties regarding their
actions toward animals. These duties derive from
the respect or moral concern they are now obligated
to afford to animals but are in conflict with the
consequentialist (utilitarian) view. A consequentialist
may well agree with the concept that animals have
moral worth but reject the absolute view of violating that worth when doing so maximizes the greatest benefit balanced against the harm to an animal.
Most researchers are likely to be utilitarian in their
view of using animals in research. Even Peter
Singer, viewed by many as the founder of the animal rights’ movement, concedes the use of animals
as research subjects could be justified if it produced
more utility than disutility. 54 His major claim is simply that it is wrong to give less consideration to the
suffering of an animal than one would give to the
similar suffering of a human being. This claim does
not support the abolition of animal research. It only
compels the researcher to demonstrate (from a utilitarian calculation) that the good to be derived from
the animal’s suffering outweighs the evil of the suffering. If one accepts the aggregate benefit of using
animals for medical cures, especially when a particular protocol involves no pain to the animals, there
can be little left to worry about in the utilitarian
calculation. One criticism of this view is that the perceived benefits of an experiment are in doubt until
after the experiment has run its course. If there is no
benefit, then only retrospectively can it be concluded
that the animal’s loss produced no aggregate benefit.
This view still grants some moral status to animals
and places an obligation on researchers to develop
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
554
well-designed protocols using the lowest form of
animal model suitable to validate the scientific hypothesis. Consequently one considers the welfare
of animals without having to take the extreme position of an animal rights’ advocate.
A Definitive Rights Position
Regan presents a clearly articulated position in
The Case for Animal Rights. 59 Regan’s position revolves around a fundamental right—the right not
to be harmed on the grounds that doing so benefits
others. This position is in distinct contrast to the
classic utilitarian. Harm in Regan’s view is the loss
of the capacity to form and satisfy desires. For any
living thing that can form and satisfy desires, the
ultimate harm is death—the complete loss of one’s
ability to form and satisfy those desires. As to the
issue of delineating a list of which animals are capable of forming desires, Regan is reluctant to
“draw lines.” He is quite satisfied that at least mammals and birds have this desire but will admit that
humans have this capacity to a greater degree than
other mammals and birds. Consequently, Regan
postulates that if four humans and a dog are in a
lifeboat that can support only four occupants, none
of the humans should be harmed because each
stands to lose more than the dog. Regan calls this
scenario the application of the “worse-off” principle. Because a human being’s capacity to form and
satisfy desires is greater than that of any nonhuman animal, a human stands to lose more in death
than the dog. Harming any of the humans is
avoided because they stand to lose more than the
dog. Peter Singer believes that this conclusion demonstrates an inconsistency in Regan’s position. 54
Regan also formulates a rule of action called the
“miniride” principle. In this view, there is an attempt to minimize the overriding of an individual’s
rights. In this way one is not using a utilitarian view
of aggregate happiness but rather is focusing on the
individual. Thus, in Regan’s mind, utilitarian reasoning is avoided. The problem is that in applying
the miniride principle the same conclusions are
derived as when the principle of utility is applied.
Regan simply wants to emphasize focusing on the
individual and minimizing any overriding of the
animal’s rights as opposed to focusing the aggregate happiness produced by the principle of utility.
Critics suggest that Regan, in his formulation of
these moral principles, fails to establish standards
that support the total abolition of animal research. 60
Hypothetically, if it were known with certainty that
an experiment could produce a vaccine that would
save human lives, then it would be justified in either of Regan’s principles to harm the animal, even
to the point of death, to produce the vaccine. Therefore, even someone like Regan, a complete abolitionist of animal research, who advocates a moral
rights position, would have to concede that at least
some medical research with animals is morally permissible (justified).
Summary
What is interesting about the preceding comparison of the utilitarian and rights positions is that in
either case, whether one accepts the moral equality
claim or subscribes to the view that humans have
greater capacity to satisfy desires, both views justify at least some medical research. Consequently
the question then becomes a matter of deciding
which experiments are justifiable and which are not.
This question becomes more a matter of oversight
and regulation than the outright prohibition of animal research. This debate has increased the burden
for scientists to justify their use of animals but in
so doing has benefited the animals and contributed
to better science.
In considering the proponent and opponent positions of animal research the views can be summarized
in the context of competing ethical theories and interests. From both a teleological and deontological
perspective there are reasonable arguments to justify the use of animals in research. Both perspectives provide ethical principles by which to consider
any justification for animal research: comfort, wellbeing, pleasure, sentience, and purposiveness. Although researchers may be able to move away from
animal use with emerging technology, at least for
the present their use is still required. Hence the
question is less about the ethics of animal research
and more about the ethics in animal research. Researchers should use animals with good reason.
Protocols must adhere to sound experimental design and subscribe to the ethical and legal codes of
conduct relevant to the care and use of animals in
research. Most significantly, researchers must take
great strides to reduce the pain and suffering inflicted on animals in the conduct of research. Finally,
as a society there ought to be a commitment to developing alternatives to animal use when such alternatives will produce credible scientific results.
Military research may present a problem regarding
the development of alternatives to animal research.
One example is the need to conduct physiologic
studies regarding methods to combat biological
and chemical weapons. Data obtained from aniMedical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
555
mal studies indicated the safety and efficacy of the
nerve agent antidote used by the US military during the Persian Gulf War. Given that the goals of
military biomedical research are directly linked to
enhancing the well-being and reducing the suffering of military personnel, most Americans would
accept the use of animals in this research as ethically justifiable. Consequently, the issue narrows to
defining how much animal use is justified in serving the aims of military biomedical research. To this
end, military researchers face the same ethical concerns as civilian researchers in mitigating animal
suffering for the benefits derived to improve the
human condition. Ethical analysis provides guidelines to govern animal care committees for the humane care and use of laboratory animals. This same
analysis does not support a complete prohibition
of animal research. Application of ethical parameters
might well suggest that animal use in military biomedical research has greater justification than civilian research as military research consistently
aims at reducing significant human suffering and
death produced by the weapons of modern warfare.
In many instances, animal studies are the only way
to verify the harm that exists to military personnel
from various weapons, but animal studies are also
necessary to study the effects of American weapon
systems and military material on American personnel. To this end, military biomedical research needs
to consider the ethical requirements of conducting
good science while considering the humane treatment and welfare of laboratory animals.
MILITARY WOMEN’S RESEARCH PROGRAM
A national agenda is forming on women’s health
that focuses on the previous lack of female subjects
in research; the lack of funding for research of
women-unique diseases; the need to improve access to healthcare for women; and the desire to improve preventive care for women. The problem of
specific data gaps related to women’ s health issues
has already received national attention. The General Accounting Office issued a report in June 1990
demonstrating that despite federal policy dating
back to 1986, women continue to be excluded in
biomedical research populations. 61 As recently as
June 1994, the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
issued new guidelines to enhance medical research
standards to include more women and minorities
in research studies. Not only are women and minorities to be included but their subpopulations are
to be noted and numbered. 62,63
The efforts to overcome data gaps created by previous policies have significant relevance for military women. The US military deployed nearly
40,000 women to Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War. Throughout this deployment significant female soldier health and performance issues
surfaced in the areas of occupational and environmental health hazards, psychosocial and posttraumatic stress illness, clinical safety and efficacy of
licensed and investigational pharmaceutical and
biological products, and preventive health and sustained duty performance. Similar to the civilian
medical community, there are scant research studies of military relevance that focus on womenunique health problems and military women are
excluded disproportionately to their male counterparts as research subjects.
In the 1990s several programs were instituted to
redress this problem. 64,65 In 1994, the Congress established the Defense Women’s Health Research
Program (DWHRP) to “address the critical health
and performance issues impacting women in the
military.”65 There were two main components of the
research programs: (1) those utilizing institutions
that are part of an agency or activity of the DoD or
other US military service department (the intramural program) or civilian institutions that would collaborate with military institutions; and (2) those
utilizing agencies outside the government, both for
profit and nonprofit, both public and private (the
extramural program).
The intramural research program solicited research proposals in the following four areas: (1)
major factors affecting the health and work performance of military women; (2) psychological and
health issues resulting from the integration of
women into a hierarchical male environment or related women and men living and working in close
quarters; (3) health promotion and disease prevention; and (4) access to delivery of healthcare. The
extramural program solicited research proposals in
four areas related to the intramural research: (1)
operational effectiveness for mission accomplishment; (2) health promotion and disease prevention;
(3) psychological health and well-being; and (4)
access to and delivery of healthcare. By fiscal year
1995 a total of 66 research programs had been
funded for the intramural and extramural programs. Similar levels of research activity will likely
continue well into the future to redress the prior
lack of research into issues pertaining to the health
of women serving in the military.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
556
THE PROBLEM OF EXCLUSION
offered as a way of protecting minorities from these
past practices of exploitation. Thus the principle of
beneficence is upheld in the sense that excluding
minorities from studies protects them from the possible harm of exploitation. This explanation fails to
consider that the harm of exploitation is a product
of failing to adequately inform the research subject
of the inherent risks to research participation. Informed consent is supposed to mitigate against exploitation. The paternalism of “protecting” minorities is a subtle form of unjust discrimination and
applies protectively only in the case of nonclinical
investigations. In clinical investigations, exclusion
and paternalism possibly deny minorities the benefits of the research. Hence, the real issue is not a
matter of “protecting” minorities from harm but
allowing them to participate as equals in the research enterprise with full knowledge of the risks
so they may also derive the benefits of the research
outcomes. Therefore, a practice of exclusion lacks
ethical justification in relationship to the principle
of beneficence.
One must not judge too harshly the failure of the
position that exclusion protects minorities from
exploitation in the research process. The backlash
of Tuskegee and similar studies not only led to a
paternalistic view of protecting minorities but also
caused a reluctance on the part of minority groups
to participate in the scientific enterprise. Both of
these trends fail to uphold the principle of beneficence. Additionally, the exclusion practice in seeking to do good (granted a charitable interpretation)
violates the principle of justice. Current ethical practices in research, based on the principle of justice,
require a fair and equitable distribution of burdens
and benefits—giving people what they deserve
(benefits) mitigated against the amount of their involvement in the process (risk-taking). An exclusion practice cuts two ways in violating the principle of justice. First, medical research is subsidized
with tax dollars. If a segment of the population financially supports the research enterprise and then
cannot benefit from its outcomes, such a practice
violates the justice principle. Likewise, if a segment
of the population benefits from research but does
not accept the associated risks, be they physical or
financial, this practice also violates the principle of
justice. Consequently the requirement to expand
protocols to include women satisfies both aspects
of the justice principle.
Another consideration used to justify exclusion
of women from studies is the possibility of a woman
Various articles have been written exploring the
problem of exclusion. 66,67 The fundamental issue,
having already identified probable causes for a gender bias in healthcare, is to recognize the ethical imperative for correcting recognized deficiencies. One
aspect of ethical analysis is to determine whether
there exists sufficient ethical justification for a particular practice, namely an exclusion policy toward
women in medical research and treatment protocols.
Given the basis for biomedical research to obtain
generalizable data for improving health and treatment, one must ask whether exclusion practices
violate the principle of beneficence. The application
of beneficence suggests that research practices
should maximize benefit and minimize harm. To
violate this principle the practice of exclusion must
cause harm or diminish expected benefits. Applying
this principle to the practice of excluding women
from research protocols, several harms are evident.
First, the physiological differences between men
and women make it inappropriate to simply generalize findings from research conducted on male
subjects. For instance, a variety of male-only studies
for heart disease, cholesterol, and asthma medication
led to treatment alternatives actually detrimental
to women’s health. Even though one can argue the
need for uncomplicated data from a homogeneous
test population, this scientific requirement (or expediency perhaps) does not justify conducting studies on all male groups. During the Persian Gulf War,
female soldiers received the same dosage rates of
pyridostigmine bromide, a nerve agent pretreatment antidote, as their male colleagues. Testimony
during the Senate hearings on illnesses associated
with service in the Persian Gulf suggested physiological differences in men and women could affect safe
dosage levels for women causing various side-effects and a possible connection to unexplained illnesses in women who had served in the Persian
Gulf War. Consequently, studies conducted without female test subjects may lack the very scientific
merit the study was initially designed to support.
These obvious harms aside for the moment, one
explanation offered in the past to defend exclusion
practices is that such practices actually prevent
harm to women and other minorities simply because they are minorities. The early history of biomedical research in this country is replete with the
exploitation of disadvantaged groups as research
participants. The infamous Tuskegee syphilis study
stands as a permanent fixture to these unethical
abuses. Consequently, exclusion practices might be
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
557
research participant getting pregnant during the
study resulting in harm to the unborn child (commonly referred to as unforeseeable teratogenic risk).
The principle of nonmaleficence (avoid causing
harm) is the ethical principle ofttimes used in this
defense. Military research protocols and the accompanying informed consent require special counseling
for fertile women volunteers regarding the hazards
of birth defects and miscarriage should pregnancy
occur in the course of the study. Researchers funded
on DoD dollars must inform women of the need to
use birth control during the study. Pregnancy is often used as an exclusion criteria to withdraw
women subjects from a study. Given these conditions, complete exclusion from the onset of a study
may be too general and broad a practice. Even
though precaution is clearly warranted to avoid
potential harm to an unborn child (and one can
debate whether enforced contraceptive use is too
strong a precaution), a real harm is created by simply excluding women with the ability of conceiving children. The key to mitigating risk with fertile
women subjects is to determine the degree of risk
each protocol actually presents to a developing
child—the greater the risk, the more exclusive the
selection criteria could be for fertile women. Still
this parameter need not mean total exclusion. Not
all fertile women are sexually active nor would be
necessarily so while participating in a study.
Past research practices of exclusion should not
be construed as intentionally seeking to discriminate against women. The lack of enlightened sensitivity and thinking in this area is more likely attributed to convenience, saving money, simplifying the
design of protocols, and simplifying logistical requirements to accommodate both sexes during the
conduct of a study. The fact remains that there exists a gender bias in selecting research subjects and
this bias is harmful to the welfare of women. Value
judgments have been made in American society
about practices that cause harm—they are unethical. Hence because exclusion practices cause harm,
or at least have been demonstrated to cause harm,
exclusion practices are unethical.
Much is being done to correct the previous gender bias in research selection. The military medical
research programs are expanding to cover womenunique problems associated with military duty and
job performance. Most notably perhaps was the creation of a DoD breast cancer research program in
1993. Congress directed the Army to execute a
breast cancer research program based upon a number of factors. The major effort came from a highly
visible lobbying effort by the National Breast Cancer Coalition, a grass roots advocacy effort to eradicate breast cancer, seeking congressional funding
for the breast cancer program at the National Cancer Institute (NCI). The US Congress responded by
directing $210 million to the US Army Medical Research and Development Command (which later
became the US Army Medical Research and Materiel Command) to create a breast cancer program. 68
The overall objective of this funding is to promote
research directed toward reducing the incidence of
breast cancer, increasing survival rates, and improving the quality of life of those diagnosed with the
disease. This program extends beyond the traditional military medical research mission and is indicative of the strides being taken to correct past
practices. Still the lesson to learn is that it is necessary to stay vigilant to uncover other biases in medical research and healthcare as yet undetected.
Finally, now that the research community is expanding its horizon to include women-unique studies, women must be willing to become active participants in the research process. What must be guarded
against in the developing process of a women’s
health agenda, however, is that whatever biological and physiological differences might be discovered do not become a means to perpetuate unjust
discriminatory practices in employment and career
paths. This is perhaps unlikely, but a word of caution is prudent when the study of environmental,
physiological, and nutritional aspects of women’s
health specifically related to military duty is begun.
Such differences, by themselves, ought not be used
to exclude women from such service. Instead, ways
to solve these various problems should be explored.
CONCLUSION
The ultimate mission of military medical research
is to provide preventive and therapeutic products
for the welfare of the soldier. To this end military
medical research must remain committed both in a
professional sense and an ethical one. Military
medical research is a noble enterprise with a long
history of significant contributions to healthcare,
not only for soldiers but for the greater society as
well. The US Army Medical Research and Materiel
Command has been managing and administering
targeted appropriations to the Department of Defense from Congressional direction since 1992. Appropriations totaling in excess of $1. 1 billion for
breast cancer, women’s health issues, and other
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
558
specified programs highlight key aspects of military
medical research with a clear vision committed to
ethical aims of improving quality of life. These programs are managed by skilled, multidisciplinary
teams of military and civilian scientists and clinicians. The National Academy of Sciences and the
Institute of Medicine have participated in program
reviews and development seeking to substantiate
the ethical and scientific credibility of these programs. These programs received strict review of
Congressional oversight committees and are committed to public accountability in the investment
of funds to address the research needs of targeted
diseases.
Unlike the past, stakeholder participation is at
the very heart of the implementation strategy of
these research programs. Open communication
among research participants, scientists from various
disciplines, consumer advocate groups, leading
government, academic, and private organizations
are all partnering to ensure unique issues and gaps
in medical knowledge no longer exist. Expanding
the opportunities for gender specific research is only
one facet of the program that lends credence to the
fact that times have changed and that program development and funding target these specific gaps and
remedy the failures of the past. The growth of military medical research is not only a good thing for the
military but for society as a whole. The growth of ethical awareness toward the use of medical research for
the benefit of society and preserving the very core of
the healing professions—caring, compassion, and the
relief of suffering—continues as a necessary and essential component of these research programs.
REFERENCES
1.
Moore GE. Principia Ethica. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press; 1993: Preface.
2.
Lifton RJ. The Nazi Doctors. New York: Basic Books; 1986; xii.
3.
Nass M. The labyrinth of biological defense. PSR Q. 1991;1(1):24–30.
4.
Statement from the Society for Social Responsibility in Science. Quoted by: Nass M. The labyrinth of biological
defense. PSR Q. 1991;1(1):24–30.
5.
Newman S. Vaccines and BW. Genewatch. 1985;2(2):12.
6.
Wright S. The military and the new biology. Bull At Sci. 1985:(May):10–25.
7.
Dasey C. Medical benefits of the Biological Defense Research Program. Polit Life Sci. 1990;9(Aug):77–83.
8.
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. The Belmont
Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research. Available at: http://
ohrp.osophs.dhhs.gov/polasur.htm. Accessed 16 April 2002.
9.
Annas GJ, Grodin MA. The Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code: Human Rights in Human Experimentation. New
York: Oxford University Press; 1992.
10.
The World Medical Association. Regulations in Time of Armed Conflict. Adopted by the 10th World Medical
Assembly, Havana, Cuba, October 1956, edited by the 11th World Medical Assembly, Istanbul, Turkey, October
1957, and amended by the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The World Medical
Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association; 1993: section 17. 50.
11.
Neel S. Medical Support of the US Army in Vietnam 1965–1970. Washington, DC: OTSG, US Department of the
Army; 1973; Chap 10.
12.
Stich SP. The recombinant DNA debate. Philos Public Aff. 1978;7(3):187–205.
13.
Cohen C. When may research be stopped? N Engl J Med. 1977;296(21):1203–1210.
14.
Jonas H. Freedom of scientific inquiry and the public interest: The accountability of science as an agent of
social action. Hastings Cent Rep. 1976;6(4):15–18.
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
559
15.
Sinsheimer RL, Piel G. Inquiring into inquiry: Two opposing views. Hastings Cent Rep. 1976;6(4):18–19.
16.
Sidel V. Biological weapons research and physicians: Historical and ethical analysis. PSR Q. 1991;1(1);24–30.
17.
Frisina ME. The offensive-defensive distinction in military biological research. Hastings Cent Rep. 1990;20(3):19–22.
18.
Wilker N, Connell N. Update on the military and biotechnology. Genewatch. 1987;4(4-5):1–3.
19.
Geneva Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and Their Destruction, 10 April 1972. 26 UST 57, TIAS 8062.
20.
Smith RJ. UN says Iraqis prepared germ weapons in Gulf War; Baghdad balked, fearing US nuclear retaliation.
Washington Post. 26 August 1995:A1.
21.
US Army Medical Research and Development Command. Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement:
Biological Defense Research Program (RCS DD-M [AR] 1327). Fort Detrick, Frederick, Md: USAMRDC; April 1989.
Available at: http://mrmc-www.army.mil. Accessed 24 June 2002.
22.
Graber R. UMass anthrax research safe. Daily Hampshire Gazette. 21 January 1989:1.
23.
Graber R. Researcher says anthrax study safe. Daily Hampshire Gazette. 6 March 1989:1.
24.
Gately B. Anti-anthrax fight reaches selectmen. Massachusetts Daily Collegian. 28 March 1989:1.
25.
Wilker N. BW Research on UMass-Amherst campus opposed. Genewatch. 1989;5(6):4.
26.
Macklin R. On the ethics of not doing scientific research. Hastings Cent Rep. 1977;7(6):11–13.
27.
Roth B. The moral arguments against military research. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1989;577:21–23.
28.
Dineger R. The moral arguments for military research. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1989;577:10–20.
29.
Sieber JE. Planning Ethically Responsible Research: A Guide for Students and Internal Review Boards. Newbury Park,
Calif: Sage Publications; 1992.
30.
Beecher HK. Ethics and clinical research. N Engl J Med. 1966;274(24):1354–1360.
31.
Rothman DJ. The shame of medical research. N Y Rev Books. 2000;47(19):60–64.
32.
Angell M. The ethics of clinical research in the Third World. N Engl J Med. 1997;338(12):847–849.
33.
Varmus H, Satcher D. Ethical complexities of conducting research in developing countries. N Engl J Med.
1997;337(14):1003–1005.
34.
Merson MD, Blanche S, Herrington D, et al. Ethics of placebo-controlled trials of zidovudine to prevent the
perinatal transmission of HIV in the Third World [a series of short articles]. N Engl J Med. 1998;338(12):836–844.
35.
Public Law 93-348, National Research Act, 12 July 1974.
36.
Sugarman J, McCrory DC, Powell D, et al. Empirical research on informed consent: An annotated bibliography.
Hastings Cent Rep. 1999;29(1):S1–42.
37.
Brett A, Grodin M. Ethical aspects of human experimentation in health services research. JAMA. 1991;265(14):1854–1857.
38.
Winter PE. Human subjects research review in the Department of Defense. IRB. 1984;6(3):9–10.
39.
Scicchitano J. I’m a human guinea pig. Army Times. 30 October 1989:14.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
560
40.
Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under the Control Council Law No. 1011-14
(1946–49). Available at: http://ohsr.od.nih.gov/nuremberg.php3; Accessed 29 May 2002.
41.
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Final Report. Washington, DC: GPO; 1995.
42.
Welsome E. The Plutonium Files: America’s Secret Medical Experiments in the Cold War. New York: Dial Press; 1999.
43.
Moreno JD. Undue Risk: Secret State Experiments on Humans. New York: Freeman Press; 1999.
44.
Wilson memorandum. Dated 26 February 1953. From the Secretary of Defense to the secretaries of the army,
navy, and air force. Available at: http://www.tis.eh.doe.gov/ohre/roadmap/achre/chap1_3.html; Accessed 7
June 2002.
45.
Hudson N. Cold war secrecy linked to unethical tests on troops. Army Times. 6 June 1994:23.
46.
21 USC sec 355(1); 1988.
47.
Letter, sent from the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs to the Assistant Secretary for Health of
the Department of Health and Human Services, dated 30 October 1990.
48.
Annas GJ. Changing the consent rules for Desert Storm. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(11):770–773.
49.
Poikonen J, McCart GM, Veatch RM. Waivers for military use of investigational agents. Am J Hosp Pharm.
1991;48(7):1525–1529.
50.
Howe EG, Martin ED. Treating the troops. Hastings Cent Rep. 1991;21(2):21–29.
51.
Levine C. Military medical research: 1. Are there ethical exceptions? IRB: Rev Hum Subjects Res. 1989;11(4): 5–7.
52.
Cooper RM. Military medical research: 2. Proving the safety and effectiveness of nerve gas antidote—a legal
view. IRB: Rev Hum Subjects Res. 1989;11(4):7–9.
53.
Kessler DA. The regulation of investigational drugs. N Engl J Med. 1989;320(5):281–288.
54.
Singer P. Tools for research. In: Animal Liberation. New York: Avon Books; 1975: 27–91.
55.
Cohen C. The case for the use of animals in biomedical research. N Engl J Med. 1986;315(14):865–870.
56.
The Case Book of Experiments With Living Animals. Jenkintown, Pa: The American Anti-Vivisection Society; August 1988.
57.
Donnelley S, Nolan K, eds. Animals, science, and ethics. Hastings Cent Rep. 1990;20(3):S1–30.
58.
Caplan AL. Beastly conduct: Ethical issues in animal experimentation. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1983;406:159–169.
59.
Regan T. The Case for Animal Rights. Berkeley: University of California Press; 1983.
60.
Varner G. The prospects for consensus and convergence in the animal rights debate. Hastings Cent Rep.
1994;24(1):24–28.
61.
Federal Report. The Office of Research on Women’s Health in the 1990s. J Am Med Women’s Assoc. 2000;56:77–78.
62.
Wakefield J. NIH requires studies to include minorities. US Medicine. 26 June 1994.
63.
Ziskin LZ, Favata EA. Creating an agenda for women’s health. N J Med. 1993;90(12):930–932.
Medical Ethics in Military Biomedical Research
561
64.
Department of Defense. Section I. CDMRP overview. FY99 CDMRP annual report. In: Congressionally Directed
Medical Research Programs. Available at: http://cdmrp.army.mil/annreports/1999annrep/section1.htm. Accessed
9 May 2002.
65.
Department of Defense. Section X. Defense Women’s Health Research Program. FY99 CDMRP annual report.
In: Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs. Available at: http://cdmrp.army.mil/annreports/
1999annrep/section10.htm. Accessed 9 May 2002.
66.
Dresser R. Wanted: Single, white male for medical research. Hastings Cent Rep. 1992;22(1);24–29.
67.
Cotton P. Examples of gaps in medical knowledge. JAMA. 1990;263:2113–2117.
68.
Department of Defense. Breast Cancer Research Program. In: Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs.
January 31, 2002. Available at: http://cdmrp.army.mil/pubs/factsheets/bcrpfactsheet.htm. Accessed 29 May
2002.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
562
