The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
507
Chapter 17
THE COLD WAR AND BEYOND: COVERT
AND DECEPTIVE AMERICAN MEDICAL
EXPERIMENTATION
SUSAN E. LEDERER, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
THE DISCLOSURE OF BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH PROGRAMS
HUMAN EXPERIMENTATION IN THE UNITED STATES BEFORE 1940
Research Conducted by the Military
Government-Sponsored Research
RESEARCH TO SUPPORT THE AMERICAN WAR EFFORT
Research on Chemical Warfare Agents
Research on the Prevention and Cure of Infectious Diseases
The Increasing Concern About Research Risk and Liability
THE POSTWAR WORLD AND “CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY”
The Judgment at Nuremberg
The Impact of the Nuremberg Tribunal on the American Medical Research
Community
Expansion of Rules to Protect Research Subjects
Public Health Service Exemption From Research Controls: The Tuskegee
Study
HUMAN EXPERIMENTATION DURING THE COLD WAR ERA
The Nuremberg Code and the United States Government
The Human Radiation Experiments
The Central Intelligence Agency and “Mind-Altering” Substances
The US Army and Biological Warfare Tests in America
SECRECY AND SCIENCE
CONCLUSION
*Formerly, Member (1994 to 1995), President’s Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments; currently, Assistant Professor, Section of the History of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, Yale University, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8015
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
508
More than 70 boys, including these three, at the Fernald State School in Waltham, Massachusetts, participated in tests
with cereals containing radioisotopes of iron and calcium. These studies, sponsored by Quaker Oats and the Atomic
Energy Commission, were conducted by investigators at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology during the Cold
War.
Photograph reproduced with permission from Brooks Kraft/Sygma Corbis.
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
509
INTRODUCTION
continuum, or a “slippery slope,” of medical excesses toward medical atrocities, then it is imperative that the past activities of the American medical research community be examined.
How is it that the average American could know
so much about the German programs and, until recently, so little about the American programs?
How is it that the German research programs have
been viewed by many as the very embodiment of
“evil medicine,” while disclosures of unethical
American research do not seem to engender the
same visceral reaction among the American public
as a whole? Is it because American programs were
somehow more ethical or is it because in America
there was a different standard or a different perception of America’s values and its role in the
world? These are troubling issues to consider. The
first step in such a consideration is to understand
the programs themselves.
I will explore covert and deceptive medical experimentation programs as they occurred in the
United States before, during, and after World War
II. The decisions to conduct these programs were
made in the context of the world as it was then. The
task now is what can be learned from those decisions to conduct deceptive research, and the human
consequences of those actions, to prevent the recurrence of such programs.
The three previous chapters in this volume have
examined medical experimentation during the
1930s and 1940s in Germany and Japan. It is likely
that most readers already knew something of the
German biomedical experiments (although perhaps
less so of the physicians’ leadership in these experiments). It is also possible that many readers knew
some of the details of the Japanese biomedical programs (although perhaps less so of the US utilization
of the data from these programs). Some readers may
wonder why a chapter on covert and deceptive
American medical experimentation would immediately follow the graphic descriptions of German
and Japanese medical atrocities. Is it my intent to
suggest that American transgressions were of similar magnitude or horror? Would such a suggestion
not only unfairly characterize the American efforts,
but also diminish the horror of the German and Japanese atrocities? It is not my intent to do either, but
rather to put these events in perspective.
If, as a country, there is a desire to portray the
German and Japanese biomedical experimenters as
“evil,” and American medical experimenters as
“patriotic,” or, given the context of the times, their
motives as “understandable,” then it is important
to explore the American medical research community in the 20th century, particularly as it evolved
after the end of World War II. If there is indeed a
THE DISCLOSURE OF BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH PROGRAMS
The experimentation programs in Germany were
divulged in stark detail during the Nuremberg Trials that followed Germany’s surrender. Among
American physicians, the barbarities of the Nazi
medical program were also viewed as an aberration. Simply put, this was something that had happened in another place, another culture, a different
form of government. It had happened there, but it
couldn’t happen anywhere other than there, at that
time, and in those circumstances. That was now in
the past, although it certainly had to be remembered. But as long as it was remembered, it couldn’t
happen again. And it certainly couldn’t happen in
any country that had moral and decent citizens and
a democratic government, which was how most
Americans saw themselves and their country in
those years immediately after the end of the war
when America had “saved the world from fascism.”
Most of the American public at war’s end had
little, if any, knowledge of the Japanese biomedical
research programs that were conducted during this
same time. There was no American or Allied trial
of Japanese doctors comparable to the Nuremberg
Tribunal, other than a brief trial in the former Soviet Union. There were the tribunals that convicted
members of the Japanese military for their involvement in the war, but none targeting the medical establishment. And, just as importantly, there was a
tremendous amount of work to be done to rebuild
devastated countries. Transportation systems, manufacturing bases, housing, food, and medical needs
all had to be addressed. It was easy to assume that
the only physicians who had conducted these heinous experiments had been in Germany, and most
had been held accountable by the tribunals.
There were other reasons, as well, that the public did not know about the biomedical research programs conducted by the Japanese. Foremost, as detailed in Chapter 16, it was believed to be in
America’s best interests to utilize the results of the
Japanese programs in America’s ongoing preparation for confrontation with the former Soviet Union.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
510
Although it had been an ally during World War II,
there were no misconceptions about the threat it
posed once the war had ended. And although Allied forces had captured Japanese biomedical experimenters at the end of World War II, Soviet forces
had taken control of their remaining research facilities and reports. The American government was
actively seeking to prevent Soviet knowledge of the
Japanese germ warfare tests. A tribunal would have
seriously undermined this attempt at secrecy.
The US government had a need to maintain
weapons’ superiority, and if not superiority, then
at least “parity” with the Soviets in any future conflict. These weapons systems included nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons. The US government
also saw little need to let the Soviets know what
information the Americans had garnered from the
Japanese, or to let the American public know that
its government was willing to negotiate with the
Japanese doctors to gain their information, rather
than arresting, trying, and punishing them for their
deeds. It was easier and more prudent to simply
keep quiet about the Japanese biomedical research.
Thus at war’s end, Americans observed the Nuremberg Trials, saw that there were verdicts and punishments meted out, and continued with the task
of reestablishing lives that had been disrupted for
4 years during the war. Few if any Americans had
any real sense of what their own government had
done during those war years, or in the years that
followed as the Cold War drug on.
In 1972, as the war in Vietnam wound down and
America struggled with the divisiveness that the
war had fostered, the public learned of the Tuskegee
Syphilis Study. After public disclosure and the report of the Ad Hoc Tuskegee Syphilis Study Panel,
the Secretary of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare terminated the study in 1973.
Many Americans were dismayed at the revelation
of the study, which had documented the course of
untreated syphilis in black men. There was a prevailing sense of outrage that a program that had
begun in the 1930s, and clearly seemed racist by
standards in the 1970s, could have continued for so
long without being halted. There was, however,
another prevailing sense: that this was a relatively
isolated event, that it could be explained away as
something sinister and racially motivated from a
previous generation, and that although shameful,
it was not indicative of a broader problem within
the American medical research community.
It was not until 1994 that most Americans had
any real understanding of the magnitude of covert
and deceptive medical research that had been ongoing in this country throughout most of the Cold
War. In 1994, President William J. Clinton announced that based on information provided to him
by Hazel O’Leary, his Secretary of Energy, he was
appointing an Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. The Committee was tasked to
explore and document research activities that had
begun in the late months of World War II and continued for the next 30 years. I was an appointed
member of that committee.
The committee held 16 public meetings and 4
field hearings in 18 months. 1 During that time, the
committee researched archival records; the radiation experiments (an estimated 4,000 different studies in all) were examined in detail. We presented
our final report, 900 pages in length, summarizing
the scope and mass of the research efforts during the
Cold War to the president in 1995. After receiving
the report, President Clinton apologized to the men,
women, and children who had participated in human radiation experiments sponsored by the United
States government in the years between 1944 and
1974. Acting on the recommendations of the committee, Clinton acknowledged the Cold War legacy
of mistrust and suspicion fostered by governmentsponsored radiation experiments, and announced
the establishment of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission to insure the future protection of
human subjects in biomedical research. 2 In 1997
President Clinton formally apologized on behalf of
the American people to another group of Americans: the participants in the Tuskegee Syphilis Study
and their families.
Both the Tuskegee Syphilis Study and much of
the radiation research involving human subjects
were not covert projects in the strict sense. Results
from the Public Health Service (PHS) syphilis study,
for example, were published in the medical press
(some 13 articles appeared in all from 1936 to 1973).
In the popular press in the 1950s and 1960s, reporters described human radiation experiments as
“burn” studies (conducted on both African-American college students and white medical students3)
and blood studies (involving radioisotopic iron
performed on inmates at a state prison4). The apparent openness of these and other studies, however,
has been contested by many of the participants or
their families who insist that they had little understanding of their role in this research, and little
knowledge of the risks involved in their participation.
In light of the often imprecise dividing line between covert and openly conducted studies, this
chapter includes both those performed clandestinely under federal auspices, as well as studies like
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
511
many of the human radiation experiments that were
carried out without a security “blanket.” There are
two compelling reasons for this inclusion. First, the
fact that studies like the syphilis study were not
secret should not obscure the deceptions researchers engaged in to secure the cooperation of their
subjects when they were alive and the inducements
to procure familial cooperation once the subjects
were dead. Second, many of the reforms and protections subsequently undertaken to insure the ethical conduct of research involving human subjects
have occurred as a result of disclosures about experiments such as the human radiation experiments
that were not fully understood by participants in
the projects or the general public.
This chapter examines the American experience
with human experiments performed in the decades
between the 1940s and the 1990s. It begins with the
research climate as it prevailed on the eve of American entry into World War II and moves on to a review of the rules for research during wartime. In
addition, the chapter considers the creation of the
landmark rules for ethical human experimentation
in the immediate postwar period, the Nuremberg
Code, produced amid the prosecution of 23 medical defendants at the Doctors’ Trial in Nuremberg
in 1947. Finally, the chapter considers the conduct
of human experimentation in the shadow of
Nuremberg, including human radiation experiments—covert and noncovert—sponsored by the
United States government, LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) studies sponsored by Central Intelligence Agency, and biological warfare tests performed on American soil. Only by examining this
subject can the medical community, including the
military medical community, prevail in preventing
the recurrence of such covert and deceptive medical experimentation.
HUMAN EXPERIMENTATION IN THE UNITED STATES BEFORE 1940
On the eve of American entry into World War II,
human experimentation remained a small-scale
enterprise, involving only limited numbers of medical researchers and human subjects. Much of the
research effort in the first four decades of the 20th
century was directed at the infectious diseases that
continued to threaten American lives and interests,
and most of the experiments devised by physicians
and researchers were conducted on small numbers
of human subjects. Much of the research conducted
in this period involved self-experimentation or the
use of colleagues and students as research subjects.
In other cases, researchers turned to their own family members. In the search for an effective polio
vaccine, for example, pathologist John A. Kolmer
tested his polio vaccine on himself, his two children,
and 23 other children “all immunized at the request
or with the written consent of their parents,”5(pp107–
108) before proceeding to a larger trial involving some
300 children.
Research Conducted by the Military
Among the most ambitious and successful human experiments conducted in the early 20th century were those sponsored by the US Army. In 1900,
Major Walter Reed and his colleagues in the Yellow
Fever Board in Havana used American soldiers and
Spanish volunteers to document the mode of transmission of yellow fever, which remained a significant
detriment to American interests in the Caribbean.
Reed developed a novel approach to exposing volunteers to the risk of yellow fever; he drew up a
written contract available in Spanish and English
that identified the risks and benefits in the yellow
fever studies (see Figure 17-1). Although this novel
departure would not meet the current federal standards of informed consent for participation in research, Reed’s contract illustrates that rules for research, especially research undertaken without
therapeutic benefit to the individual, existed among
members of the research community at the turn of
the century.
Government-Sponsored Research
Not all research in American-occupied territories
turned out as satisfactorily as Reed’s expedition. In
the American-occupied Philippines, American researcher Richard P. Strong exploited the availability of inmates in a Manila prison to test a newly
available cholera vaccine. In 1906 Strong inoculated
24 men with an experimental cholera vaccine; all
the men fell ill and 13 died. The vaccine was later
shown to be contaminated with live plague organisms. Apparently the first American to use prisoners for medical research, Strong was subjected to a
lengthy investigation and eventually exonerated,
although members of the investigating committee
believed he had overstepped the bounds of his authority by subjecting the prisoners to an experimental vaccine. In subsequent studies, including a 1912
study of beriberi also involving inmates from
Manila’s Bilibid Prison, Strong proceeded with
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
512
greater caution, obtaining from each of the prisoners a written statement affirming the voluntary nature of his participation and his willingness to complete the studies. 6
Government-sponsored research also occurred
within the continental United States. In 1932, the
Public Health Service (PHS) began the longest running nontherapeutic research study in American
history, the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. Initially intended to shed light on racial differences in the
natural history of syphilis, the study entailed periodic clinical observations of more than 400 AfricanAmerican men diagnosed with secondary syphilis
who were not receiving treatment for their disease.
In order to insure the “success” of the no-treatment
study, scientists in the Venereal Disease Division at
the Public Health Service actively misled their male
subjects about the nature of their participation in
the project. The men, for example, were informed
they had “bad blood” rather than syphilis, and they
were asked to undergo lumbar puncture, a “special
treatment” for their condition. Lumbar puncture is
not a treatment but a purely diagnostic procedure
involving removal of spinal fluid for testing. When
penicillin became available in the 1940s, government scientists took steps to ensure that the men in
the study did not receive this new and effective
drug. The ethical violations of the Tuskegee study
are addressed in detail in the chapter subsection
titled “PHS Exemption From Research Controls: The
Tuskegee Study.” It is important to note that the
legacy of the Tuskegee study still resonates strongly
within the African-American community. The study
has become a powerful symbol of the exploitation
Fig. 17-1. Consent form, completed in Spanish, dated, and signed by both the subject and the experimenter (a). Consent form, translated into English, dated, but not signed (b). Courtesy of Historical Collections and Services, The
Claude Moore Health Sciences Library, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
a
b
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
513
of unsuspecting and vulnerable African-Americans
at the hands of the white medical establishment. 7,8
During the 1930s, prisoners in both state and federal prisons in the United States also participated
in research on infectious disease. In 1933, researchers at the National Jewish Hospital in Denver tested
a newly developed vaccine for tuberculosis on inmates of the Colorado State Prison. In order to gain
access to this population, the researchers negotiated
with the governor’s office and agreed to recruit their
subjects using a written consent form drafted by the
state attorney general. The document indicated each
prisoner understood the potential risks of his participation, and agreed to do so voluntarily and without coercion. From the researcher’s point of view,
convicted criminals offered considerable advantages as research subjects. They could be readily
monitored in conditions controlled by researchers.
In the 1930s, some researchers viewed prisoners in
federal penitentiaries as similarly attractive subjects
for infectious disease research. In 1933, when St. Louis
experienced an epidemic of the encephalitis that
would come to be known as St. Louis encephalitis,
researchers from the Public Health Service were dispatched to the city to discover how the disease was
transmitted. After submitting their own bodies to
mosquitoes fed on the blood of those infected with
the disease, investigators sought additional subjects.
Surgeon General Hugh Cumming approached Sanford
Bates, Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, for
permission to obtain volunteers at federal prisoners.
Bates, however, would not authorize such studies on
the grounds that prisoners were not in a position to
consent freely and without duress to such research.
Ironically, research on federal prisoners was sanctioned at two large facilities built for federal prisoners suffering from drug addiction. In cooperation with
the Federal Bureau of Prisons, the Public Health Service built hospitals in Lexington, Kentucky and Fort
Worth, Texas where prisoners participated in research
for information about the nature of drug addiction
and its treatment. Unlike the encephalitis studies, the
studies on narcotic addiction offered the possibility
of some therapeutic benefit for the prisoners.
In summary, before 1940, most human experiments involved relatively small numbers of research
subjects and participants. At no time were investigators completely free to do whatever they pleased
with their research subjects. In research involving
risk without therapeutic benefit, researchers were
expected to have the knowledgeable permission of
their research subjects. To be sure, not all investigators adopted the practice instituted by Walter
Reed of using written consent documents to ensure
that participants recognized the risks and benefits
of their role as subjects, but clearly many investigators (though not all, as evidenced by the Tuskegee
Syphilis Study) recognized a responsibility for the
welfare of their subjects and hesitated to place subjects at risk in experiments.
RESEARCH TO SUPPORT THE AMERICAN WAR EFFORT
Even before the bombing of Pearl Harbor and the
subsequent declaration of war, American authorities began to prepare for war in Europe and the
Pacific. Part of the humanitarian effort to aid the
Allied forces and civilians was a massive collection
of plasma for British soldiers and civilians, known
as the “Blood for Britain Program.”9 On other fronts,
the American entry into the war signaled an unprecedented coordination of scientific research under
federal auspices. In 1941 President Franklin D.
Roosevelt established the Office for Scientific Research and Development (OSRD). Led by Vannevar
Bush, former dean of engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the OSRD’s mission
was the coordination, funding, and oversight of
scientific research for the American war effort.
Within the OSRD, the Committee on Medical Research (CMR) was dedicated to wartime medical
investigations. Chaired by University of Pennsylvania pharmacologist Alfred Newton Richards, the
CMR distributed over $24 million to 137 institutions
in the United States, the District of Columbia, and
the Panama Canal Zone. Among the funding priorities of the CMR was research on chemical warfare agents and the prevention or cure of infectious
diseases, especially those likely to be encountered
by the armed forces.
Research on Chemical Warfare Agents
Amid vivid memories of mustard gas deployment by the Germans during World War I, the
American government readied itself for chemical
warfare, conducting extensive research into gas
warfare agents. The tests were aimed at prevention,
amelioration, and effect of the agents. The tests involved putting agents on human subjects, either
with or without test ointments, as well as tests in
which human subjects wore suits impregnated with
chemicals designed to retard vapor penetration. By
the time the war had ended in 1945, more than
60,000 American service personnel had been exMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
514
posed to mustard gas (sulfur and nitrogen mustard)
and Lewisite (an arsenic-containing agent) as part
of a large-scale research effort. More than 4,000 servicemen had participated in trials using high concentrations of mustard gas or Lewisite, or in exercises conducted in contaminated areas. The men,
whose exposures to these toxic gases ranged from
mild to severe, were instructed not to disclose their
participation in these trials. For more than 40 years,
they continued to keep the nature of their exposure
secret. In 1991 an expert committee of the Institute
of Medicine (IOM), National Academy of Science,
reported there was evidence of a causal relationship between exposure to these chemical agents
(mustard gas and Lewisite) and the development
of respiratory cancers (including lung, laryngeal,
and nasopharyngeal), skin cancer, leukemia, chronic
respiratory disease (including asthma and emphysema), and a variety of eye diseases. 10
As the IOM committee’s extensive report amply
revealed, the men recruited into these studies did
so with only limited information about the possible
physical and mental effects of their exposure.
Although the human subjects were called “volunteers,” it was clear from the official reports that
recruitment of the World War II human subjects,
as well as many of those in the later experiments,
was accomplished through lies and half-truths. 10(pvii)
At the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), for example, soldiers were induced to take part in the gas
chamber tests by offers of extra leave and the promise of a “change in scenery.” Recruiters were explicitly instructed not to give too much information at
the beginning of the experiments, so as not to deter
the subjects from participation. Records from the
gas chamber work at the NRL indicate that some
men experienced severe injuries as a result of their
exposure. Perhaps it is not surprising, therefore, that
morale became a problem for experimenters. Official reports from the facility provided instructions
for managing uncooperative individuals, including
administering a “short, explanatory talk and if necessary, a slight verbal ‘dressing down.’”10(p67) Despite
the knowledge that exposure to these agents produced long-term, debilitating physical effects, the
Department of Defense conducted no follow-up,
either short-term or long-term, of the effects, and
instead swore the men to secrecy. The extensive
nature of the World War II research program into
chemical warfare became public knowledge only
when several veterans approached the Veterans
Administration seeking compensation for health
injuries resulting from their exposure to the gases.
Research on the Prevention and Cure of Infectious
Diseases
In addition to chemical warfare agent research, the
CMR funded research projects investigating such
infectious diseases as malaria, influenza, dysentery,
and sexually transmitted diseases. Many of the human subjects for research into new vaccines for these
diseases were not military personnel but civilians, especially children housed in custodial institutions. Cincinnati physicians Merlin Cooper and B.K. Rachford,
for example, used children in the Ohio Soldiers and
Sailors Home in trials of an immunizing agent effective against dysentery. Utilizing different suspensions
applied in different ways (intravenous, intramuscular, and subcutaneous), the researchers caused severe
reactions in the children tested, effectively eliminating the vaccine for use among soldiers. Dysentery
projects funded by the CMR were also performed at
the Dixon Institution for the Retarded, in Illinois, and
the New Jersey State Colony for the Feeble-Minded.
Indeed, having access to a custodial population where
such diseases could be studied enhanced the status
of a grant application to the Committee. In some of
the trials funded by the CMR, vaccine tests were accompanied by deliberate challenge with the infectious
agent. When Werner Henle conducted trials of a vaccine against influenza A he administered the vaccine
to children housed in a state facility for the retarded
and a correctional institution for youthful offenders.
Some of the subjects developed painful nodules at the
site of injection. 11 Three to six months after the vaccine was administered, residents were fitted with a
aviation oxygen mask and exposed to a preparation
of the virus for 4 minutes. Some of the subjects developed influenza. 11
The Increasing Concern About Research Risk
and Liability
In 1942 the National Research Council’s Subcommittee on Venereal Disease approached A.N.
Richards soliciting the CMR’s stance on human experimentation. Such experimentation, Richards informed syphilologist Joseph Earle Moore, was not
only desirable, but necessary in light of wartime
demands. But Richards also noted that only volunteers should be used as subjects when the experiment posed any risks, and
only after the risks have been fully explained and
after signed statements have been obtained which
shall prove that the volunteer offered his services
with full knowledge and that claims for damages
will be waived. 12(p73)
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
515
Richards also noted the necessity of maintaining a
complete record of the “terms in which the risks
involved were described.”12(p73)
Richard’s explication of the CMR’s attitude toward human experimentation makes clear the continuing commitment of American researchers to
informing volunteers about risks resulting from
participation in nontherapeutic research. But it also
illustrates a new concern—the issue of liability to a
volunteer in case of an adverse outcome—that many
researchers began to experience in this period of
increasing medical research involving human subjects. Richards had already confronted the problem
in the context of wartime experiments involving the
search for a blood substitute.
Despite the massive blood collection efforts, the
search for an effective blood substitute continued
apace during World War II. At the behest of the
National Research Council, Harvard protein chemist Edwin Cohn and his team developed a blood
substitute, based on bovine albumin, that had considerable promise. After some initial testing of the
blood substitute on Harvard medical students and
hospital patients in Boston and Minneapolis, the
researchers employed Massachusetts prisoners as
research subjects. At Cohn’s behest, lawyers for the
OSRD met with agents from Lloyd’s of London concerning insurance coverage to indemnify Harvard
University against possible financial losses resulting from the research effort. When Lloyd’s agreed
to write such a policy for a premium of $2,000,
Harvard officials concluded the cost for the insurance was too high, and conducted the research without insurance coverage. As historian Jon Harkness
has shown, the decision haunted university researchers and administrators when one of the prisoner-subjects died on 30 September 1942 as a result
of his participation. In a strange turn of events, prisoner Arthur St. Germaine received a posthumous
pardon in light of his participation as a research
subject, and his burial expenses were charged to
Edwin Cohn’s CMR grant.
The unfortunate death of a research subject did
not stop human experimentation under CMR auspices, but it inspired some caution on the part of
administrators like Richards and Vannevar Bush.
When two investigators proposed to infect prisoners with gonorrhea to study the results of chemical
prophylaxis of a disease that cost the armed services thousands of man-hours, the CMR conducted
an intensive discussion about the political and ethical ramifications of such experimentation with human subjects. The gonorrhea studies would not be
the only ones in which the political consequences
of such experimentation received the same consideration as the ethical. In the case of wartime and
postwar human radiation experiments, for example,
the issue of public relations, rather than national
security or the ethics of human experimentation,
influenced the decision to keep some experiments
hidden from public scrutiny. After protracted discussion about the legality, expediency, and ethical
dimensions of the study, the gonorrhea experiments, including the experimental infection of male
volunteer inmates, began in 1943. For their willingness to undergo intra-urethral inoculations of gonococci, the prisoners received the sum of $100, a certificate of merit, and a letter of commendation was
forwarded to their parole board.
In summary, hundreds, if not thousands, of Americans—soldiers, prisoners, conscientious objectors,
orphans, and the institutionalized mentally ill and
mentally handicapped—participated in medical research during World War II. But such research did
not take place in an ethical vacuum nor did it occur
without consideration of the rights of research subjects and the responsibilities of individual researchers. Some of the research subjects did experience adverse outcomes without adequate understanding of
the risks they incurred as a result of the investigations (this was especially true of the work performed
using children and mentally incapacitated adults),
but this failure should not obscure the fact that the
American research community recognized ethical
limits in the use of human subjects. Nonetheless, the
line between acceptable and unacceptable experiments
remained ambiguous. As should be apparent from
this discussion, during this period there was inadequate professional guidance to influence these behaviors. What, then, had been the role of the organized medical profession in these research studies?
In 1916 leaders of the American Medical Association (AMA) had briefly considered amending the
organization’s code of ethics to include a provision
on human experimentation calling for the knowledgeable permission of the subject. The AMA leadership
decided not to adopt such a stance believing it both
unnecessary in light of the good moral character of
American medical researchers and undesirable insofar as such a requirement would impede the progress
of medical research. 5 Despite the decision to forego
codifying a position on human experimentation, there
existed through World War II an informal, if unwritten, consensus that required consent from healthy
subjects when their lives or well-being were potentially threatened by participation in research and responsibility for the welfare of patients who took part
in therapeutic studies.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
516
THE POSTWAR WORLD AND “CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY”
risks and utility of experiments on humans, to proceed only when the risk of the procedure is balanced
by “the humanitarian importance” of the problem
to be solved by experiment, and to be prepared to
terminate the experiment at any stage if the experiment seems likely to result in death or injury to the
research subject.
The Impact of the Nuremberg Tribunal on the
American Medical Research Community
Bioethicists George Annas and Michael Grodin
have called the trials of the Nazi physicians “the most
important historical forum [ever] for questioning the
permissible limits of human experimentation.”15(p3)
The Nuremberg Code has become an important
milestone in the history of research ethics, but what
did it mean to American investigators far removed
from the Nazi death camps and the Nuremberg
courtroom?
The Nuremberg Medical Trial, like the trials of
other Nazi officials, was reported in the American
popular press. Moreover, magazines and newspapers published “human interest” stories about the
victims of the Nazi experimenters, including the
“Ravensbrueck lapins,” the 74 young Polish women
used by Nazi medical researchers in experiments
on bone and muscle transplantation and wound
infection. 16
Such coverage, however, was hardly exhaustive.
When the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments interviewed a number of medical
investigators in 1995 about the import of the
Nuremberg Code in their working lives in the late
1940s, few had vivid recollections of the trial and
its implications for their own work. One exception
was Dr. Herbert Abrams, a radiologist who was
completing his residency at Montefiore Hospital in
the Bronx during the trial. Dr. Abrams, recalling the
extensive reportage of the trial, emphasized that the
Doctors’ Trial was something “we were aware of
and that affected the thinking of everyone who was
involved in clinical investigation.”17
It is perhaps not surprising that the atmosphere
of Montefiore Hospital would be influenced by the
trial. As a traditionally Jewish hospital, it had become home to a number of refugee Jewish physicians who fled Germany in the early years of the
Nazi regime. For most American investigators,
however, the trial seemingly exerted little impact;
it involved doctors and human subjects in a differIn December 1946, as part of the preparation for
the prosecution of 23 Nazi medical defendants at
Nuremberg and acting on the advice of its Judicial
Council, the American Medical Association (AMA)
House of Delegates adopted a formal position on
human experimentation. Three conditions had to
be satisfied to conform to the ethics of the AMA:
(1) the voluntary consent of the individual participating in an experiment had to be secured; (2) previously conducted animal experimentation to ascertain the risks for human subjects had to be reviewed;
and (3) the requirement that the research be conducted under proper medical supervision had to be
met. The AMA’s decision to take this step reflected
the behind-the-scenes work of University of Illinois
pharmacologist Andrew C. Ivy, who served as one
of the principal American advisors to the team of
lawyers prosecuting the Nazi physicians. In his capacity as medical adviser to the American prosecutors, Ivy himself underwent tense cross-examination by the German attorneys defending the Nazi
doctors, and was called on to explain the reliance
of American investigators on prisoners and conscientious objectors as research subjects. 13 One of the
prosecution witnesses, Werner Leibrand, was also
questioned on this issue of voluntary participation,
as detailed in Exhibit 17-1.
The Judgment at Nuremberg
Part of the final judgment at the Nuremberg Doctors Trial was a set of 10 principles that have come
to be known as the Nuremberg Code14 (Exhibit 172). The Nuremberg doctors’ trial was essentially an
American activity; the judges were all American
jurists who relied on their American experts—Ivy
and Alexander—to come up with the standard by
which to judge the Nazi crimes. The 10 principles
in the code set the parameters for ethical human
experimentation. The first principle (and the most
frequently cited) states that the voluntary consent
of the human subject is absolutely essential. Moreover, the human subject in question must be in a
position to exercise autonomous decision making,
possess the legal capacity to consent to experimentation, and should be presented sufficient information and knowledge to make an informed choice.
In addition to the insistence on the knowledgeable
participation of an autonomous decision maker, the
other principles required investigators to conduct
animal experimentation to establish in advance the
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
517
EXHIBIT 17-1
THE ISSUE OF “VOLUNTARY PRISONER PARTICIPATION” RAISED BY THE DEFENSE AT
THE NUREMBERG TRIBUNAL
One of the issues raised during the testimony of Andrew C. Ivy was American reliance on prisoners as subjects
of medical experiments. The issue of prisoner experimentation arose during the questioning of Werner
Leibbrand, a German psychiatrist and medical historian. American prosecutors hoped that Leibbrand, who
had been persecuted by the Nazis, would establish the deleterious effects of Nazi dictatorship on the German
medical profession. In his cross-examination of the German physician, Robert Servatius, the German attorney
defending Karl Brandt (Hitler’s personal physician) questioned Leibbrand at length about the voluntary participation of prisoners in research. 1(pp67–69)
Servatius:
Witness, are you of the opinion that a prisoner who had over ten years’ sentence to serve
will give his approval to an experiment if he receives no advantage there from? Do you
consider such approval voluntary?
Leibbrand:
No. According to medical ethics, this is not the case. The patient or inmate [is] basically
brought into a forcible situation by being arrested …
Servatius:
Are you of the opinion that eight hundred prisoners under arrest at various places who
give their approval for an experiment at the same time do so voluntarily?
Leibbrand:
No.
Servatius:
You do not distinguish as to whether the experiments involve permanent damage … or
whether it is temporary?
Leibbrand:
No.
Servatius:
If such prisoners are infected with malaria because they declared themselves willing do
you consider that .… admissible?
Leibbrand:
No, because I do not consider such a declaration of willingness right from the point of
view of medical ethics. As prisoners they were already in a forced situation.
Servatius’s question about infection with malaria became clear when he confronted the German witness and
the American jurists with the 4 June 1945 issue of the American periodical Life magazine. This issue featured
several photographs of the inmates of prisons in Georgia, New Jersey, and Illinois, participants in a federally
sponsored malaria research program. After his discussion of the prison malaria experiments and citations to
other American experiments involving prisoners, Servatius pointedly asked Leibbrand about the acceptability
of such experiments on a captive population:
Servatius:
Now will you please express your opinion on the admissibility of these experiments?
Leibbrand:
On principle I cannot deviate from my view mentioned before on a medical, ethical basis.
I am of the opinion that such experiments are excesses and outgrowths of biological thinking.
By this line of questioning, Servatius sought to establish the similarities of the concentration camp experiments with the research conducted in American prisons, thereby mitigating the degree of Nazi culpability.
Despite this effective cross-examination, the American judges at Nuremberg found Karl Brandt and 15 of his
colleagues guilty of war crimes and medical crimes.
To reach their conclusions about the guilt and innocence of the medical defendants, the judges articulated a set
of ten principles of “Permissible Human Experiments.” These principles, which were formulated in the pretrial preparation and during the trial itself, have come to be known as the Nuremberg Code. In developing the
principles, the American judges at Nuremberg relied heavily on two American physicians, the physiologist
Andrew C. Ivy and psychiatrist Leo Alexander. 2
Sources: (1) Moreno JD. Undue Risk: Secret State Experiments on Humans. New York: Routledge; 2001. (2) Weindling P. The
origins of informed consent: The International Scientific Commission on Medical War Crimes, and the Nuremberg Code.
Bull Hist Med. 2001;75:37–71.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
518
EXHIBIT 17-2
THE NUREMBERG CODE
In their book, the Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code, Annas and Grodin discussed the American influence
on the formation of the Code. 1(p135)
At the Nuremberg Doctors’ Trial, the American prosecutors relied on two expert American witnesses,
the Chicago physiologist Andrew C. Ivy and Boston neurologist and psychiatrist Leo Alexander. For the
benefit of the American lawyers, Alexander wrote a 6-point memorandum entitled “Ethical and NonEthical Experimentation on Human Beings.” The similarity between Alexander’s memorandum and the
rules for permissible human experimentation (what would come to be known as the Nuremberg Code,
[shown below]), especially his first principle that the “legally valid voluntary consent of the experimental subject is essential” have prompted some authors to credit Alexander with the primary authorship of
the Nuremberg Code. However, in his summation, chief prosecutor James McHaney relied on both
Andrew’s memorandum and the testimony supplied by Andrew Ivy during the trial to argue the guilt of
the Nazi physicians.
Directives for Human Experimentation
NUREMBERG CODE2
1.
The voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential. This means that the person involved should have legal capacity to give consent; should be so situated as to be able to exercise free
power of choice, without the intervention of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, over-reaching, or other ulterior form of constraint or coercion; and should have sufficient knowledge and comprehension of the elements of the subject matter involved as to enable him to make an understanding
and enlightened decision. This latter element requires that before the acceptance of an affirmative
decision by the experimental subject there should be made known to him the nature, duration, and
purpose of the experiment; the method and means by which it is to be conducted; all inconveniences
and hazards reasonable to be expected; and the effects upon his health or person which may possibly
come from his participation in the experiment.
The duty and responsibility for ascertaining the quality of the consent rests upon each individual
who initiates, directs or engages in the experiment. It is a personal duty and responsibility which
may not be delegated to another with impunity.
2.
The experiment should be such as to yield fruitful results for the good of society, unprocurable by
other methods or means of study, and not random and unnecessary in nature.
3.
The experiment should be so designed and based on the results of animal experimentation and a
knowledge of the natural history of the disease or other problem under study that the anticipated
results will justify the performance of the experiment.
4.
The experiment should be so conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering
and injury.
5.
No experiment should be conducted where there is an a priori reason to believe that death or disabling injury will occur; except, perhaps, in those experiments where the experimental physicians
also serve as subjects.
6.
The degree of risk to be taken should never exceed that determined by the humanitarian importance
of the problem to be solved by the experiment.
7.
Proper preparations should be made and adequate facilities provided to protect the experimental
subject against even remote possibilities of injury, disability, or death.
8.
The experiment should be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons. The highest degree of
skill and care should be required through all stages of the experiment of those who conduct or
engage in the experiment.
9.
During the course of the experiment the human subject should be at liberty to bring the experiment
to an end if he has reached the physical or mental state where continuation of the experiment seems
to him to be impossible.
(Exhibit 17-2 continues)
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
519
ent country in a different time, and had little relevance to the search for new drugs and procedures
to cure human ills.
The disparity between events in wartime Germany and efforts in postwar America was furthered
by the American popular press, which helped sustain an image of human experimentation as a noble,
if potentially risky, enterprise as practiced in American hospitals and medical schools. In the years between 1948 and 1960, popular magazines like The
Saturday Evening Post, Readers Digest, and American
Mercury featured stories about “human guinea
pigs” and self-sacrificing scientists who willingly
exposed their own bodies to risk for the benefit of
science. 17
In 1952, for example, the New York Times reported
the death of an 18-year-old college honor student
at the University of Washington, one of 40 volunteers in “an experiment connected with war research on blood preservation.” What is remarkable
about the short article is the matter-of-fact reporting of the boy’s death, the willingness of the physicians—Robert H. Williams and Clement Finch—to
“gladly participate in the same experiment tomorrow,” and the father’s insistence that he held no one
at fault for his son’s death. Rather than blame the
investigators or the institution, Stanley Leedom told
reporters “I just don’t want this tragedy [the death
of his son] to deter in any way from the blood donor program or these experiments.”18(p18)
Expansion of Rules to Protect Research Subjects
As the pace of clinical research accelerated rapidly in the years after the end of World War II, issues relating to human experimentation did not
disappear. The scientific literature and the papers
in the archives of medical institutions suggest the
strains and tensions that using human subjects created for some experimenters. At the University of
California at San Francisco (UCSF), for example,
researchers at the Laboratory of Experimental Oncology (LEO) confronted these issues in the search
for treatments for patients with terminal cancer. In
the early 1950s cancer researcher Michael Shimkin
and his colleagues were criticized for performing
“drastic, deleterious procedures on patients” and
for using a release form for admission to the research ward that was “psychologically harmful,”
including as it did provision for autopsy should the
patient die. On a visit to the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), which funded the LEO, Shimkin met
with NIH director James Shannon to discuss the
accusations that his group was performing “vivisection on man.” Following this meeting, Shimkin
introduced several “remedial steps,” including review by the cancer board of the medical school of
“all new departures in clinical research.”19(p127)
Shimkin organized a public symposium on the
issues relating to human experimentation with a
physician colleague, Otto Guttentag, in October
1951. Although it may have been difficult for researchers to confront the differences between therapeutic and nontherapeutic studies on human subjects, Guttentag, a homeopath by training, directly
explored the tensions in clinical investigation. Distinguishing the “physician-friend” from the “physician-experimenter,” Guttentag worried that the
experimenter would not be able to resist taking
advantage of a patient’s distress in the interests of
advancing knowledge. In his view,
research and care would not be pursued by the
same doctor for the same person, but would be kept
distinct. The physician-friend and the physicianexperimenter would be two different persons as far
as a single patient is concerned…20(p210)
The publication of the symposium presentations by
Guttentag, Shimkin, Berkeley law professor Alexander Kidd, and W.H. Johnson of the Judge Advocate
General Corps of the United States Army was delayed,
according to Shimkin, by negotiations over clinical
research policies at the soon-to-be-opened Clinical
10.
During the course of the experiment the scientist in charge must be prepared to terminate the experiment at any stage, if he has probable cause to believe, in the exercise of the good faith, superior skill
and careful judgment required of him that a continuation of the experiment is likely to result in
injury, disability, or death to the experimental subject.
Sources: (1) Annas GJ, Grodin MA. The Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code: Human Rights in Human Experimentation. New
York: Oxford University Press; 1992. (2) Reprinted from Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under
Control Council Law No. 10. Vol. 2. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1949: 181–182.
Exhibit 17-2 continued
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
520
Research facility at NIH, but the symposium papers
eventually appeared in Science in 1953. 20–23
In the 1960s, NIH director James Shannon confronted disturbing public revelations about two research projects funded by the Public Health Service
and NIH. The first involved efforts to transplant
chimpanzee kidneys into human patients at Tulane
University. In 1963, Tulane surgeon Keith Reemtsma
performed 13 transplants using kidneys taken from
chimpanzees. 24 Although most of his patients died
after 9 to 60 days, one patient lived an astonishing
9 months with the xenotransplant. This success
spurred transplanters in other medical centers to
undertake similar animal–human transplants, surgeries that received considerable public attention25–27
and raised moral questions.
The second concerned research into cancer cells
conducted at the Jewish Chronic Disease Hospital
in Brooklyn, New York. The principal investigator,
Chester Southam, a researcher at the Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Research Institute, had injected live cancer
cells into indigent elderly patients without their
consent. In addition to the absence of peer review,
Southam proceeded with the project over the objections of three physician consultants who insisted
that the patients were not able to consent to the research. Both Southam and the hospital’s medical
director Ernest Mandel received censure by the New
York Board of Regents. Although their medical licenses were suspended, the order was stayed and
the doctors placed on probation for 1 year. But the
case generated considerable publicity. 28,29(pp161–162)
The growing interest in the rights of research subjects prompted Shannon in late 1963 to convene a committee charged with studying the problem of protection for the human subjects of research. This
committee, chaired by NIH administrator Robert
Livingston, recommended no changes in NIH policies and warned that a code or standards for acceptable research would impede or delay medical research. Shannon, however, continued to believe that
the current recommendations were inadequate.
Working with Luther Terry, the Surgeon General of
the US Public Health Service, Shannon proposed to
the National Advisory Health Council, a committee created to advise the surgeon general, that NIH
should accept responsibility for formal controls on
individual investigators. When William Stewart succeeded Terry as surgeon general in 1966, he ordered
all PHS grantee institutions to take steps to review all
proposed research involving human subjects, in order to protect the rights and welfare of the individual
subjects, to consider the methods used to secure informed consent to the experiment, and to assess the
risks and benefits of the investigation. 30(pp99–100)
Public Health Service Exemption From Research
Controls: The Tuskegee Study
In 1966, at the same time that Public Health Service (PHS) policy required compliance with this
directive to protect human subjects, the Venereal
Disease Division of the PHS was continuing the
Tuskegee Syphilis Study, its long-running study of
the effects of untreated syphilis in black men in rural Alabama. None of the guidelines for peer review
and the protection of human subjects applied to the
PHS’s own research projects. When Peter Buxton, a
PHS field investigator in San Francisco, continued
to question the morality of the syphilis nontreatment
study, he was invited to attend a Centers for Disease Control (CDC) meeting on syphilis research
where he heard PHS officers defend the research
project. 31
Despite efforts to persuade Buxton that the study
would benefit physicians who treated African
Americans who had syphilis, he left the meeting
feeling that nothing had been resolved. Buxton resigned from the PHS in 1967 and entered law school
the following year. In 1968, he wrote a second letter to the CDC about the “political dynamite” that
a study restricted to black participants represented.
When Dr. David Sencer, director of the CDC, read
the letter, he agreed that the study could become a
public relations problem for the government agency.
In 1969, the CDC created a blue-ribbon panel to
determine whether the Tuskegee Syphilis Study
should be terminated. The only member of the panel
previously unfamiliar with the study, Eugene
Stollerman, chair of the Department of Medicine at
the University of Tennessee, was the only one to
insist that the Public Health Service had an obligation to treat the men for their disease. Over
Stollerman’s objections, the committee recommended continuation of the no-treatment study. In
light of the “impossibility” of securing informed
consent from the poorly educated and impoverished Tuskegee subjects, the committee recommended a form of “surrogate informed consent,”
namely approval of the Macon County Medical Society, which by 1969 consisted primarily of black
physicians. Rather than criticize the CDC doctors,
members of the medical society agreed to help investigators by promising that
if they had a list of individuals [in the study]
that they would not knowingly give them
antibiotics…but would refer them locally to the
health department and to Nurse Rivers [the black
nurse who maintained patient contact for the
PHS investigators]. 7(pp198–199)
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
521
Only 3 years later, in 1972, did the public revelation that government doctors had withheld penicillin from black men infected with syphilis supply
the catalyst for the US Congress to take action on
the issue of human subject protections. For nearly
a decade, Senators Jacob Javits (Republican, New
York), Ted Kennedy (Democrat, Massachusetts),
and Walter Mondale (Democrat, Minnesota) had
sponsored legislation calling for oversight of NIH
research and experimentation conducted under the
auspices of the Department of Defense. The public
hearings in February through July 1973, chaired by
Senator Kennedy, included testimony from several
surviving Tuskegee participants who related an
extensive list of government evasions, misrepresentations, and deceptions. The heated controversy
over human experimentation, fetal research, and
psychosurgery created momentum for the passage
in 1974 of the National Research Act. Signed into
law by President Richard Nixon, the legislation included a provision for the creation of the National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. The National Research Act also required that all research
involving human subjects undergo review and that
investigators document the written informed consent of their research subjects.
Since 1974, the system of localized institutional review boards (IRBs) set into place by the National Research Act has been criticized as ineffective in protecting the rights of human subjects. In March 1998
the Office of the Inspector General of the Department
of Health and Human Services issued a report—Institutional Review Boards: A System in Jeopardy—sharply
critical of the institutional review board system, and
containing recommendations for recasting the federal
IRB requirements to strengthen protections for human
subjects participating in research and insulate IRBs
from conflicts that potentially compromise their responsibility to protect human subjects. 32 In June 2000,
Donna Shalala, Secretary of Health and Human Services, established a new office to replace the former
Office for Protection From Research Risks. At the recommendation of Dr. Harold Varmus, then director of
the National Institutes of Health, Shalala created the
Office for Human Research Protection, locating it in
the Office of the Secretary to give the office greater
independence and stature and to provide a platform
to influence human subjects protection. To strengthen
human subjects protection, new certification programs
for individual IRB members and institutions have
been developed. According to Dr. Greg Koski, the
Director of the OHRP, “we are witnessing the move
to a professional model for human research.”33(p132)
HUMAN EXPERIMENTATION DURING THE COLD WAR ERA
The Nuremberg Code and the United States
Government
In consideration of preparations necessary to
meet the threat of nuclear, chemical, and biological
weapons being developed in communist countries,
American military interest in human experimentation increased. In 1953 Colonel George Underwood,
director of the Office of the Secretary of Defense,
noted the need for an agency-wide policy to guide
the conduct of human experimentation by military
researchers. High-ranking committees within the
armed services had debated policies for human experimentation for several years.
On the recommendation of DoD attorney Stephen
Jackson, the Armed Forces Medical Policy Council
(AFMPC) advised the secretary of defense in 1952
that “the ten rules promulgated at the Nuremberg
trials be adopted as the guiding principles to be
followed.” Jackson’s recommendation did not sit
well with other DoD committees, who preferred to
forego a policy statement that might retard research
progress. “To commit to writing a policy on human
experimentation would focus unnecessary attention
on the legal aspects of the subject,”34(p57) noted the
secretary of the Committee on Medical Sciences in
November 1952.
Despite this opposition, Charles Wilson, President Eisenhower’s new secretary of defense, signed
off on the AFMPC recommendation in February
1953. Issued as a Top Secret Memorandum (Exhibit
17-3) to the secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air
Force, the Wilson memorandum affirmed the Nuremberg principles, required the written consent of
research subjects, and prohibited experimentation
using prisoners of war. Although the reasons for
classifying the rules for research are less than clear,
it seems likely that making the document classified
information limited its circulation among military
researchers. 35(p308)
The Army quickly acted to put the Wilson memorandum into effect. Although initially classified, the
Wilson order was declassified in 1954. The Army’s
memorandum on the Wilson order included a legal
analysis identifying the source of the Army’s authority to conduct human experimentation, as well
as the limits of that authority in the selection of
human subjects. As the Advisory Committee on
Human Radiation Experiments noted in its report
in 1995, even during the height of the Korean War,
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
522
EXHIBIT 17-3
THE WILSON MEMORANDUM: FORMALIZING THE USE OF HUMAN VOLUNTEERS IN
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH
26 Feb 1953
Memorandum for the Secretary of the Army
Secretary of the Navy
Secretary of the Air Force
SUBJECT: Use of Human Volunteers in Experimental Research
1. Based upon a recommendation of the Armed Forces Medical Policy Council, that human subjects be employed, under recognized safeguards, as the only feasible means for realistic evaluation and/or development
of effective preventive measures of defense against atomic, biological or chemical agents, the policy set forth
below will govern the use of human volunteers by the Department of Defense in experimental research in the
fields of atomic, biological and/or chemical warfare.
2. By reason of the basic medical responsibility in connection with the development of defense of all types
against atomic, biological and/or chemical warfare agents, Armed Services personnel and/or civilians on
duty at installations engaged in such research shall be permitted to actively participate in all phases of the
program, such participation shall be subject to the following conditions:
a.
The voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential.
(1)
This means that the person involved should have legal capacity to give consent; should be so
situated as to be able to exercise free power of choice, without the intervention of any element of
force, fraud, deceit, duress, overreaching, or other ulterior form of constraint or coercion; and
should have sufficient knowledge and comprehension of the elements of the subject matter involved as to enable him to make an understanding and enlightened decision. This latter element requires that before the acceptance of an affirmative decision by the experimental subject
there should be made known to him the nature, duration, and purpose of the experiment; the
method and means by which it is to be conducted; all inconveniences and hazards reasonably to
be expected; and the effects upon his health or person which may possibly come from his participation in the experiment.
(2)
The concept [sic: consent] of the human subject shall be in writing, his signature shall be affixed
to a written instrument setting forth substantially the aforementioned requirements and shall
be signed in the presence of at least one witness who shall attest to such signature in writing.
(a)
In experiments where personnel from more than one Service are involved the Secretary of
the Service which is exercising primary responsibility for conducting the experiment is
designated to prepare such an instrument and coordinate it for use by all the Services having human volunteers involved in the experiment.
(3)
The duty and responsibility for ascertaining the quality of the consent rests upon each individual who initiates, directs or engages in the experiment. It is a personal duty and responsibility which may not be delegated to another with impunity.
b.
The experiment should be such as to yield fruitful results for the good of society, unprocurable by
other methods or means of study, and not random and unnecessary in nature.
c.
The number of volunteers used shall be kept at a minimum consistent with item b., above.
d.
The experiment should be so designed and based on the results of animal experimentation and a
knowledge of the natural history of the disease or other problem under study that the anticipated
results will justify the performance of the experiment.
e.
The experiment should be so conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering
and injury.
f.
No experiment should be conducted where there is an a priori reason to believe that death or disabling injury will occur.
g.
The degree of risk to be taken should never exceed that determined by the humanitarian importance
of the problem to be solved by the experiment.
(Exhibit 17-3 continues)
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
523
the Army did not view it as self-evident that the
Department of Defense could engage in human experimentation or choose any subjects it wished. 34(p61)
Limits to the practice of subjecting human subjects
to scientific experimentation were recognized in
theory, if not always in practice, as the human radiation experiments attest.
The Human Radiation Experiments
In December 1993 Eileen Welsome, a reporter for
the Albuquerque Tribune, and Hazel O’Leary, US Secretary of Energy, reopened a dark chapter in American Cold War history—the use of human subjects
in research involving ionizing radiation. The Cold
War was over and the Department of Energy had
embarked on an “openness initiative.”36(p424) Welsome
and O’Leary were on separate tracks that eventually collided—Welsome began her inquiries into the
plutonium injection cases in 1987; O’Leary was confirmed as Secretary of Energy in 1993. Secretary
O’Leary embarked on a campaign to reverse the
“culture of secrecy” that had permeated the Atomic
Energy Commission/Department of Energy (AEC/
DOE). Among other things she changed the name
of the Office of Classification to the Office of DeClassification. Her 7 December 1993 press conference
was the first in a series to “clear the air.” In the press
conference, O’Leary conceded that the government
had conducted radiation experiments on American
h.
Proper preparation should be made and adequate facilities provided to protect the experimental
subject against even remote possibilities of injury, disability, or death.
i.
The experiment should be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons. The highest degree of
skill and care should be required through all stages of the experiment of those who conduct or engage in the experiment.
j.
During the course of the experiment the human subject should be at liberty to bring the experiment
to an end if he has reached the physical or mental state where continuation of the experiment seems
to him to be impossible.
k.
During the course of the experiment the scientist in charge must be prepared to terminate the experiment at any stage, if he has probable cause to believe, in the exercise of the good faith, superior skill
and careful judgment required of him that a continuation of the experiment is likely to result in
injury, disability, or death to the experimental subject.
l.
The established policy, which prohibits the use of prisoners of war in human experimentation, is
continued and they will not be used under any circumstances.
3. The Secretaries of the Army, Navy and Air Force are authorized to conduct experiments in connection
with the development of defenses of all types against atomic, biological and/or chemical warfare agents
involving the use of human subjects within the limits prescribed above.
4. In each instance in which an experiment is proposed pursuant to this memorandum, the nature and
purpose of the proposed experiment and the name of the person who will be in charge of such experiment
shall be submitted for approval to the Secretary of the military department in which the proposed experiment is to be conducted. No such experiment shall be undertaken until such Secretary has approved in
writing the experiment proposed, the person who will be in charge of conducting it, as well as informing the
Secretary of Defense.
5. The addresses [sic] will be responsible for insuring compliance with the provisions of this memorandum
within their respective Services.
/signed/
C. E. WILSON
Copies furnished:
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Research and Development Board
TOP SECRET
Downgraded to UNCLASSIFIED
22 Aug 75
Exhibit 17-3 continued
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
524
citizens. This concession was prompted by the 45page series on the plutonium injections, written by
Welsome, that appeared in the Albuquerque Tribune. 36
Although it is true that the human radiation experiments had never been completely secret, it is also
true that the full nature and extent of human radiation experimentation in the years between 1944 and
1974 had not been known to the American public.
The report, American Nuclear Guinea Pigs,37 commissioned in 1986 by Congressman Edward J. Markey
(Democrat, Massachusetts, 7th District) had included information on the 18 patients who had received plutonium injections, as well as many others. Welsome provided additional information on
the plutonium injections, including patient names
and family photographs of the patients who participated in the studies. In 1994 President Clinton
appointed the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, chaired by Johns Hopkins bioethicist Ruth Faden, to explore and document the
extent of the human radiation studies. The committee produced the most extensive compilation to date
of the American use of human subjects at the dawn
of the atomic age, the extent of injury to research
subjects, and the continuing challenges for human
subjects research.
The Plutonium Studies
The experiments that brought renewed national
attention to the issue of government-sponsored research involved plutonium, a radioactive metallic
element first noted in 1941. As the United States
pressed forward with the construction of nuclear
weapons, scientists in the Manhattan Project grew
concerned about the health effects of the substance
for the hundreds of workers involved in the race to
build a bomb. In order to answer the question about
the biological effects of plutonium, 18 hospital patients were injected with the substance between
1945 and 1947. One received the plutonium injection at Oak Ridge Hospital in Tennessee, three at
the University of Chicago, 11 at the University of
Rochester, and three at the University of California. Although much remained unknown about plutonium, physicians involved in the research believed that injections posed little, if any, short-term
risk to the subjects. Because long-term risk was
possible, the doctors selected patients likely to die
in the near future. Although several of the patients
did die soon after their injections, a number survived for decades, despite the doctors’ prognoses
about their illnesses. 38
The plutonium injections raised (and continue to
raise) difficult moral and policy considerations, including who should serve as subjects for experiments designed to protect workers in wartime. At
the beginning of the experiments, even the word
plutonium was classified information. One might
ask how, under these circumstances, could informed
consent be obtained from the participants, and
what, if anything, were subjects or their families
told about the injections? Did the patients know,
for example, that they were taking part in a study
that was not intended to benefit them? In all likelihood these individual subjects had no clear understanding of what was being done to them.
The first patient selected for injection was a 53year-old “colored male,” Ebb Cade, hospitalized for
serious, but not life-threatening, fractures of his arm
and leg. 38(p144) Dr. Joseph Howland, an Army physician stationed at Oak Ridge, told AEC investigators
in 1974 that he administered the injection of plutonium. There was, he recalled, no consent from the
patient. He acted, he testified, only after his objections were met with a written order to proceed from
his superior, Dr. Hymer Friedell. (The ACHRE was
told by Friedell that another doctor, not Howland,
had given the injection to Cade and that he had not
ordered the injection. 38[p144] ACHRE was not able to
resolve this contradiction.) It remains unclear why
Cade was selected for the experiment, and why no
more injections were performed at Oak Ridge.
The next three plutonium injections took place
at the University of Chicago, where all three patients were seriously ill and not expected to survive.
(The first two died within 2 years of the injection;
the date of death of the third remains unknown.)
Like the Oak Ridge injection, the Chicago injections
occurred without the consent of the individuals.
At the University of Rochester, the 11 patients
who received plutonium injections were part of a
larger project designed to set standards for radiation safety for workers in nuclear facilities. In addition to tests of plutonium, researchers under the
direction of Dr. Samuel Bassett administered polonium to five patients and uranium to six people who
were also selected from “a large group of hospital
patients.”38(p148) Doctors wanted patients with kidney function that was adequate enough to test the
excretion pattern of the element. The patients selected to receive polonium were all suffering from
terminal forms of cancer (such as leukemia) and
therefore unlikely to live long. The uranium patients
included those with rheumatoid arthritis, tuberculosis, cirrhosis, and alcoholism. The patients selected for plutonium and uranium injections did not
include those with malignant disease. Although the
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
525
ostensible criteria for administering these radioactive substances was short life expectancy due to
serious illness or injury, most of the patients injected
at Rochester were not, in fact, terminally ill (at least
three of the Rochester subjects were known to be
living in 1974, and one of the subjects, Eda Schultz
Charlton, 49 years old, participated in the experiments
as the result of a mistaken diagnosis38[pp146–149]). The
evidence assembled by the Advisory Committee
supports the claims of family members that patients
knew little, if anything, about the research projects
and their status as research subjects. 38(pp146–149)
At the University of California at San Francisco
(UCSF), Doctors Joseph Hamilton and Robert Stone
undertook metabolic studies to evaluate the potential risks for workers exposed to plutonium. After
experimenting with rats, Hamilton and Stone injected three human subjects with plutonium; they
also performed one injection of americium and one
injection of zirconium in two different patients in
1947 and 1948. The first plutonium injectee was
Albert Stevens, selected in the belief he was suffering from advanced stomach cancer. After the injection, researchers learned that rather than cancer, he
had an ulcer. The researchers collected excreta from
Stevens for more than a year testing for plutonium
content. When Stevens wanted to leave the Berkeley
area, the researchers offered him money to continue
the collections for the study, but without disclosing to him the nature of his participation. Indeed,
documents located by the Committee indicate that
researchers considered two different options to retain Stevens, paying for his care in a hospital or a
nursing home or placing the man on Dr. Hamilton’s
payroll in some minor capacity. The researchers
were explicitly advised that he not “be paid as an
experimental subject only.”38(p150) In addition to
Stevens, the UC researchers injected a 4-year-old
cancer patient and a 36-year-old African-American
railroad porter named Elmer Allen with plutonium.
In Allen’s case, two physicians signed his medical
chart indicating that the experimental nature of the
injection had been explained to him, that he agreed
to be injected, and that he was of sound mind. Part
of the reason for this chart notation was the ruling
by Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) administrator Carroll Wilson in April 1947 calling for written
documentation of consent from the patient-subject
of a radiation experiment. Wilson’s directive, however, also indicated that radiation experiments
could be conducted only in the expectation of therapeutic benefit for the patient. Elmer Allen’s physicians had no expectation that the plutonium would
benefit him. Allen lived until 1991. Allen’s daughter, Elmerine Whitfield-Bell, continues to dispute
the documentation that her father agreed to the plutonium injections. In 1998 the federal government
and the families of the patients who received plutonium injections agreed to a financial settlement.
The Other Ionizing Radiation Studies
The plutonium, polonium, and uranium studies
were prominent in the public press, and thus there
was more information gathered about these studies. However, they represent only a few of an estimated 4,000 human radiation experiments conducted under government auspices during the Cold
War. Most of the 4,000 studies involved radioactive
isotopes to tag molecules for the study of iron metabolism, thyroid metabolism, calcium uptake,
blood volume, and so on. In addition to plutonium
injections, notorious studies involving human subjects and ionizing radiation in this period included
the studies conducted on “retarded” children at the
Fernald School in Massachusetts, fed oatmeal containing radioisotopic iron and calcium as members
of the “Science Club” (whose activities included getting a quart of milk daily, going to a baseball game
and the beach, and having outside dinners); the
Vanderbilt University studies in which pregnant
women received a “vitamin cocktail” containing
radioactive iron to examine nutritional requirements
during pregnancy; experiments at Walla Walla State
Prison in Washington state where prisoners were
recruited to a study of the effect of radiation on testicles (prisoners agreed to undergo vasectomy after
exposure to radiation); and studies in whole-body
radiation conducted on a largely African-American
patient population at the University of Cincinnati.
As in the plutonium case, financial settlements between the subjects and their families and the research sponsors were reached in the late 1990s.
The Central Intelligence Agency and “MindAltering” Substances
In April 1953, Allen Dulles, director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), authorized the investigation of biological and chemical materials
with the potential to alter mental states. In response
to allegations of mind-control techniques performed
by Chinese, North Korean, and Russian scientists
on American prisoners of war during the Korean
War, the MKULTRA program was established.
(Little is known about the specifics of the program,
or even, for that matter, the precise expansion of
the acronym. The “MK” diagraph identifies it as a
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
526
project of the Technical Services Staff of the Central
Intelligence Agency. The “ULTRA” part may be related to the ULTRA program of World War II,39(p61)
the program associated with cracking the German
military codes.) Under the direction of scientist
Sidney Gottleib, the program encompassed examination of such drugs as nicotine, cocaine, and, perhaps
most sensationally, the effects of the hallucinogenic
drug lysergic acid diethylamine (LSD). Although
most of the records relating to MKULTRA were intentionally destroyed by the agency in 1973, some
details of the more than 150 individual governmentfunded research projects, especially the testing of
LSD on unsuspecting participants, have become
available since then.
The CIA-sponsored research was conducted at
approximately 80 academic institutions across the
nation. In November 1953, Gottleib, without obtaining explicit permission, secretly extended his LSD
studies to men on the staff of the Special Operations Division (SOD) at Fort Detrick. During a staff
retreat, Gottleib added LSD to a bottle of Cointreau,
which was consumed by several men. One of those
affected was Frank Olson, a scientist on the SOD
staff and an expert on the airborne delivery of biological weapons. Following this episode, Olson apparently experienced severe mental distress, for
which Gottleib arranged special sessions with a
New York physician with a top secret security clearance. On the eve of Olson’s return to Maryland,
where he was scheduled to enter a psychiatric facility, he fell through a 10th-floor window of the
New York hotel where he was staying with CIA
personnel. For more than two decades, the mysterious circumstances of Olson’s death were unknown
to his family. In 1975, following congressional hearings about CIA secret activities, Olson’s surviving
family received an apology from President Gerald
Ford. In 1976, Congress enacted legislation authorizing a payment of $750,000 to the family as compensation for their loss. 40(pp191–192)
More than a quarter of a century later, questions
about Olson’s death remain troubling to his family.
In January 2000, a New York district attorney reopened the case for a grand jury deliberation in light
of forensic evidence that Olson received a blow to
the head prior to his fall. Eric Olson, Frank Olson’s
son, believes his father was deliberately killed because he was deemed a security risk. According to
the younger Olson, the CIA’s declassified assassination manual from 1953 indicated that a preferred
method for eliminating someone was to fake a suicidal jump. 40(pp316–319),41
In the 1950s, the Army Chemical Corps secretly
contracted with researchers at the New York State
Psychiatric Institute in New York City to test the
effects of hallucinogens on their patient population.
Under this contract, the Chemical Corps supplied
the researchers with mescaline for testing in human
subjects. In December 1952, when a 42-year-old tennis player, Harold Blauer, entered the Psychiatric
Institute for depression, he was selected to receive
five injections of three different experimental mescaline derivatives. Although Blauer experienced
severe distress and violent tremors after the fourth
injection, his physicians proceeded as planned with
the fifth injection, a dose 16 times larger that he had
previously received. Blauer died in little more than
2 hours following the fifth injection. The Army and
the staff of the Psychiatric Institute and the state of
New York actively concealed the embarrassing and
distressing information that Blauer’s death occurred
in trials of a chemical warfare agent. Fearing for the
doctors’ professional reputations and the financial
liability, the New York State attorney general’s office offered the family of Harold Blauer $18,000. The
Army Intelligence Division clandestinely provided
half of this amount to New York State. 42
These details, like some of the details surrounding Frank Olson’s death, came to light in 1975 as
part of a Congressional probe into research on
chemical and biological warfare agents. 42 In 1978,
the family of Harold Blauer, which had pursued the
case in the courts since 1953, was awarded $702,000
in damages by the United States District Court for
the Southern District of New York. 40(p198)
Reports in the press in the early 1970s of clandestine testing by the CIA and the Department of
Defense prompted investigations by Church Committee (named after Senator Frank Church, Democrat, Idaho) in the United States Senate and the
Rockefeller Commission, appointed by President
Gerald Ford and chaired by Vice President Nelson
Rockefeller. Acting on the recommendations of the
Church Committee, President Ford in 1976 ordered
the first Executive Order on Intelligence Activities,43 which included a provision forbidding “experimentation with drugs on human subjects, except
with the informed consent, in writing and witnessed
by a disinterested party, of each such human subject.” Under the direction of Presidents Carter44 and
Reagan,45 the order was expanded to encompass any
kind of human experimentation. 30(p107)
The US Army and Biological Warfare Tests
in America
Reports of biological weapons development by
the Germans and the Japanese prompted the United
States to institute a biological weapons research
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
527
initiative in 1941. With the support of Secretary of
War Henry L. Stimpson, the War Research Service,
headed by George Merck, president of Merck Pharmaceuticals Company, opened a facility in 1942 at
Camp Detrick (renamed Fort Detrick in 1956), Maryland for research on biological weapons. In January 1946 the Army publicly announced the nature
of the facility, where research continued for the next
30 years. There were also reports in the public press
about planning for the possibility of bacteriological warfare. 46 At Detrick, government scientists investigated anthrax, botulin and other toxins, and
other infectious organisms for their potential as biological warfare agents. During the Cold War, American development of biological weapons encompassed large-scale animal experimentation (Detrick
was the world’s largest purchaser of guinea pigs),
human volunteers, and surreptitious testing in 239
American cities between 1950 and 1969. 47
In the years between 1954 and 1973, Army authorities recruited 2,200 American soldiers to participate in defensive biological weapons testing.
Following a series of meetings between representatives of the Seventh-Day Adventist Church and
the Army Surgeon General’s Office, researchers
were able to employ Seventh-Day Adventists serving in the military as noncombatants in light of the
religious objections against bearing arms. In
“Project Whitecoat,” as the program came to be
known, Adventists participated in studies of Q fever, tularemia, Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, sand fly fever,
yellow fever, typhoid fever, and Rift Valley fever. 48
According to Abram Beneson, director of experimental medicine at Fort Detrick in 1954 and 1955,
researchers there were “very conscious” of the
Nuremberg Code and insisted that volunteers be
uncoerced and comprehending of the risks and benefits they would encounter in an experiment. 49 Participants in these studies signed written consent
forms, which included a clause with a warning that
death and injury were possible outcomes. Beneson
recalled that Army lawyers informed him that such
a consent form would not hold up if legally challenged, but Beneson persisted in order to insure that
the men understood what their involvement in the
project could mean. There were many more individuals who volunteered than could be accepted for
participation in the project.
In addition to tests on human volunteers, Army
researchers conducted deliberate releases of bacteria and aerosols in major cities to evaluate the vulnerability of Americans to biological attacks. Although many details about the testing programs
remain secret, it is known that the Army conducted
tests over more than 200 cities between 1950 and
1969. Army researchers sprayed zinc cadmium sulfide, an aerosolized fluorescent powder believed to
approximate bacterial agents as they were dispersed
in the environment, in Minneapolis and St. Louis.
In 1966 US Army researchers studied the vulnerability of the New York City subway system to bacterial attack by exposing more than a million people
to a bacterium, Bacillus subtilis variant niger. Conducted by scientists and technicians, the test involved dropping light bulbs filled with bacteria into
the subway system.
Perhaps the most serious known outcome of the
bacterial testing program involved the release of the
bacteria Serratia marcescens and Bacillus globigii.
During World War II, the Germans had reportedly
released Serratia bacteria in the subways of London
and Paris. Fearing that the Pentagon was vulnerable
to a germ attack, scientists from the Special Operations Division (SOD) at Fort Detrick in August 1949
sprayed Serratia bacteria into the vents of the
Pentagon’s air-conditioning system, revealing the
vulnerability of the building to a germ attack. In
1950 the SOD demonstrated civilian susceptibility
to such attacks by releasing Serratia microbes from
the decks of two United States naval vessels anchored in the Atlantic. In September 1950 the tests
were successfully repeated in the Pacific, where
“nearly every one of the 800,000 people in San Francisco exposed to the cloud at normal breathing rate
inhaled 5,000 or more fluorescent particles.”50(p118)
Although these bacteria were believed to pose
little threat to the population, physicians at Stanford
University writing in October 1951 reported a startling outbreak of infections at the Stanford University Hospital in San Francisco. The outbreak was
extraordinary because Serratia infections had never
before been reported in hospitals. Moreover, in spite
of extensive searching by the physicians, no cause
of the outbreak could be traced. During the outbreak
11 patients developed the infection; one, Edward
Niven, a pipefitter, died. In 1979 the Niven family
sued the federal government for $11 million for his
wrongful death. The family lost the case, and failed
to win an appeal from the United State Court of
Appeals, but the discovery process in the trial
brought much to light about the nature and extent
of the government’s biological testing program in
the Cold War. 51
The releases of these bacterial agents and aerosols were uniformly conducted without the knowledge or permission of the local population. People
riding the subway system or simply breathing the
air remained unaware of their exposure to either
bacteria or aerosolized agents such as zinc cadmium
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
528
sulfide. The United States Army Center for Health
Promotion and Preventive Medicine (the successor
of the Army Environmental Health Agency) conducted three risk assessments for cities where the
fluorescent particles were dispersed. In each of the
three assessments, risk from exposures were less
than the standards set by the 1994 Occupational
Safety and Health Administration. At the Army’s
request, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) performed an independent risk assessment, concluding that zinc cadmium sulfide posed only negligible
risk for the residents in the affected areas. 52
SECRECY AND SCIENCE
One of the principal rationales for covert and
deceptive experimentation during the Cold War
was the issue of national security. Engaged in an
emerging global struggle with the communist bloc,
the United States government strove to meet the
threat. However, national security was not the only
rationale for secrecy. Since the early 1940s, officials
of the federal government had also followed regulations that allowed secrets to be maintained not
only because their disclosure would endanger national security, but because such disclosure “would
be prejudicial to the interests or prestige of the
Nation.”53(p392)
When it began operation in 1947, the Atomic
Energy Commission expanded the practice of maintaining secrecy to encompass public relations, especially the threat of “embarrassment” and legal
liability. For example, in 1946 Dr. Hymer Friedell,
once the deputy medical director of the Manhattan
Engineering District (created by the federal government in 1942 to meet the goal of producing an
atomic weapon; the “Manhattan Project” was the
central mission of the Manhattan Engineering District), recommended the declassification of one of
the early reports describing plutonium injections
into human subjects. Two months later, in February
1947, his recommendation was overridden on the
advice of AEC officials, who noted that the “coldly
scientific manner in which the results are tabulated
and discussed would have a very poor effect on the
public.” Moreover, unless necessary legal documents
had been executed, the report left the experimenters
and the US government vulnerable to a “devastating
lawsuit” with potentially far-reaching results. 38(p153)
Fears about legal liability and “administrative
embarrassment” continued to play a role in AEC decisions to keep secret or reclassify experiments involving what UCSF researcher Robert Stone called
“unwitting subjects.”
In addition to maintaining the secrecy of human
radiation experiments, the AEC adopted policies to
forestall access to information relating to health
risks that radiation posed to workers and to the
public. The Insurance Branch of the AEC, for example,
routinely reviewed declassification decisions with
the liability issue in mind. In so doing, they continued a practice adopted by Manhattan Project officials like Robert Oppenheimer, who in 1946 asked
that all reports on health problems be separately
classified and issued at his request, the purpose
being to “safeguard the project [from] being sued
by people claiming to have been damaged.”54(p332)
Decisions to classify research as secret resulted
not only from policy making at federal agencies but
also ensued at the request of individual investigators. In the early 1950s, Everett I. Evans, a surgical
researcher at the Medical College of Virginia, successfully petitioned the Army to classify his experiments on burns associated with radiation, but not
because he feared criticism over human experimentation. Evans grew concerned about the potential
adverse public relations of his experiments in which
dogs obtained from local municipal shelters received fatal doses of radiation. In January 1951,
Evans, alarmed by reporters investigating the dog
studies, explained in a letter to Army authorities
that “there is much about the [canine studies] that I
do not like but we are doing it in a manner as humane as possible. The issue here is one of national
security.”53(p419) Fearing that local humane societies
would prevent access to animals and thereby jeopardize the research program, Evans asked that his
radiation studies be classified. The Army in response declared that all work under the Medical
College of Virginia contract be identified as restricted. Thus, the desire to insure the continuity of
the canine research also blanketed Evans’ human
radiation experiments on prisoners and hospital
patients.
When the reports of the plutonium injections and
other Cold War radiation experiments once again
became “news” in 1993, many Americans were
startled to learn about the extent of secret research
programs conducted by the federal government.
Many were puzzled by the realization that some
things were secret and others were not. How could
the radiation experiments be secret when many of
them had been published openly in the medical literature and even reported in the public press when
they occurred?
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
529
What is clear is that public tolerance for the Cold
War culture of secrecy and science had changed
dramatically. In the public testimony before the
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, many citizens came forward to express their
distrust of government officials and governmental
policies as they related to the issue of radiation exposure and research. Although many of the citizens
who spoke recognized the need in the past for secrecy (in light of pressing national security concerns), they also expressed skepticism that such
secrecy remained necessary in light of the profound
changes around the world.
From the dawn of the atomic era, there has been
ongoing tension between the openness required for
scientific inquiry and the defense establishment. A
case can be made, Senator Daniel P. Moynihan has
written, “that secrecy is for losers.”55(p227) Secrecy in
science corrodes the process of increasing our knowledge of the natural world, and secrecy in governmental science corrodes citizen trust of the government
and its leaders. “Openness,” noted Moynihan, “is now
a singular, and singularly, American, advantage. We
put it in peril by poking along in the mode of an age
now past.”55(p227) Although there are legitimate reasons for secrecy in developing weapons systems and
other defense technologies, secrecy should not be permitted in experiments involving human subjects or,
at the very least, outside review of the subjects’ consent and safeguards to protect them must be ensured.
CONCLUSION
During the last decade Americans have increasingly confronted the tragic record of clandestine and
deceptive human experimentation in the 20th century. Expert commissions have issued reports, the
injured have sought and received financial compensation, and the government has apologized to citizensubjects of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study and the
human radiation experiments. Lawsuits brought by
veterans of biological, chemical, and atomic warfare studies continue to wend their way through the
courts. These lawsuits permit a financial accounting of loss of life, liberty, and mental distress. They
do not take into account the corrosion of trust in
American researchers and the American government. Even more disturbing is the fear that these
things could happen again unless adequate safeguards remain in effect and the lessons of the past
are learned.
REFERENCES
1.
Faden RR. Chair’s perspective on the work of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments.
Kennedy Inst Ethics J. 1996;6:215–221.
2.
Building Public Trust: Actions to Respond to the Report of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments.
United States Government Human Radiation Interagency Working Group. March 1997; Publication 061-00000880-20.
3.
Warren KL. 66 volunteers given ‘flash burns’ in test. Richmond News-Leader. 8 December 1954.
4.
10 San Quentin felons used for atom tests. San Francisco Examiner. 12 April 1949.
5.
Lederer SE. Subjected to Science: Human Experimentation in America Before the Second World War. Baltimore, Md:
Johns Hopkins University Press; 1995.
6.
Chernin E. Richard Pearson Strong and the iatrogenic plague disaster in Bilibid Prison, Manila, 1906. Rev Infect
Dis. 1989;11:996–1004.
7.
Jones JH. Bad Blood. New York: Free Press; 1993.
8.
Gamble VN. Under the shadow of Tuskegee: African Americans and health care. Am J Public Health. 1997;87:1773–1778.
9.
Kendrick DB. Blood Program in World War II. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General; 1964.
10.
Pechura CM, Rall DP, eds. Veterans at Risk: The Health Effects of Mustard Gas and Lewisite. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press; 1993.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
530
11.
Rothman DJ. Strangers at the Bedside: A History of How Law and Bioethics Transformed Medical Decision Making.
New York: Basic Books; 1991.
12.
Harkness JM. Research Behind Bars: A History of Medical Experimentation on American Prisoners [dissertation].
University of Wisconsin; 1996.
13.
Harkness JM. Nuremberg and the issue of wartime experiments on US prisoners. JAMA. 1996;276:1672–1675.
14.
Katz J. The Nuremberg Code and the Nuremberg Trial: A reappraisal. JAMA. 1996;276:1662–1666.
15.
Annas GJ, Grodin MA, eds. The Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code: Human Rights in Human Experimentation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1992.
16.
Cousins N. Dialogue in Warsaw: Report on the Ravensbrueck Lapins. Saturday Review. 1958;41:9–11, 32–36.
17.
Faden RR, Lederer SE, Moreno J. US medical researchers, the Nuremberg doctors trial, and the Nuremberg
Code. JAMA. 1996;276:1667–1671.
18.
Contaminated blood injection kills youth in Seattle preservation research project. New York Times. 25 March
1952:18.
19.
Shimkin M. As Memory Serves: Six Essays on a Personal Involvement With the National Cancer Institute, 1938–1978.
Bethesda, Md: US Department of Health and Human Services, PHS, NIH; 1983.
20.
Guttentag OE. The physician’s point of view. Science. 1953;117:207–210.
21.
Shimkin M. The problem of experimentation on human beings. Science. 1953;117:205–207.
22.
Kidd AM. Limits of the right of a person to consent to experimentation on himself. Science. 1953;117:211–212.
23.
Johnson WH. Civil rights of military personnel regarding medical care and experimental procedures. Science.
1953;117:212–215.
24.
Reemtsma K. Renal heterotransplantation from nonhuman primates to man. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1969;162(1):412–418.
25.
Spare parts from chimp to man. Time. 27 December 1963:41.
26.
2 monkey kidneys transplanted into woman in pioneer operation. New York Times. 12 October 1963.
27.
Schmeck HM Jr. Patient is alive after six weeks with two kidneys from a chimpanzee. New York Times. 18 December 1963.
28.
Katz J. Experimentation With Human Beings. New York: Russell Sage Foundation; 1972.
29.
Faden R, Beauchamp TL. A History and Theory of Informed Consent. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986.
30.
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Government standards for human experiments: The
1960s and 1970s. In: Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. New York: Oxford
University Press; 1996: 97–112.
31.
Testimony by Peter Buxton from the United States Senate Hearings on Human Experimentation, 1973. In: SM
Reverby, ed. Tuskegee’s Truths: Rethinking the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press; 2001: 150–156.
32.
Institutional Review Boards: A System in Jeopardy. Washington, DC: Office of Inspector General, Department of
Health and Human Services, Report OEI-01-97-00193; March 1998.
33.
The JIM interview with Greg Koski, MD, PhD. J Investigative Medicine. 2001;49:131–133.
The Cold War and Beyond: Covert and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation
531
34.
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Government standards for human experiments: The
1940s and 1950s. In: Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. New York: Oxford
University Press; 1996: 45–73.
35.
Annas GJ, Glantz LH, Katz BF. Informed Consent to Human Experimentation: The Subject’s Dilemma. Cambridge,
Mass: Ballinger Publishing; 1977.
36.
Welsome E. The Plutonium Files: America’s Secret Medical Experiments in the Cold War. New York: Dial Press; 1999.
37.
American Nuclear Guinea Pigs: Three Decades of Radiation Experiments on US Citizens. Report prepared by the
Subcommittee on Energy Conservation and Power of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, US House of
Representatives, November 1986. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1986.
38.
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Experiments with plutonium, uranium, and polonium. In: Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. New York: Oxford University
Press; 1996: 139–171.
39.
Marks J. The Search for the Manchurian Candidate: The CIA and Mind Control. New York: Norton; 1979.
40.
Moreno JD. Undue Risk: Secret State Experiments on Humans. New York: Routledge; 2001.
41.
Frank Olson Legacy Website. Available at: http://www.frankolsonproject.org/index.html. Accessed 26 November 2001.
42.
US Army Inspector General. Use of Volunteers in Chemical Agent Research. Washington, DC: US GPO; 1975.
43.
Executive Order 11905 (19 February 1976).
44.
Executive Order 12036, Section 2-301 (26 January 1978).
45.
Executive order 12333, Section 2-10 (4 December 1981).
46.
Parr L. The professor talks about bacterial warfare. Hygeia. 1942;20:344–345, 364, 368–369.
47.
Mobley JA. Biological warfare in the twentieth century: Lessons from the past, challenges to the future. Mil
Med. 1995;160:547–552.
48.
Smith KT. Adventists and biological warfare. Spectrum. 1996;25:35–50.
49.
LoLordo A. Project Whitecoat: Human testing done with care. Baltimore Sun. 3 April 1994;1E.
50.
Regis E. The Biology of Doom: The History of America’s Secret Germ Warfare Project. New York: Henry Holt; 1999.
51.
Cole L. Clouds of Secrecy: The Army’s Germ Warfare Tests Over Populated Areas. Savage, Md: Rowman & Littlefield; 1990.
52.
Committee on Government Operations, Subcommittee on Legislation and National Security, US House of Representatives, 28 September 1994, Oversight Hearing On Cold War Era Human Subject Experimentation, Statement of Michael A. Parker.
53.
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Secrecy, human radiation experiments, and intentional releases. In: Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. New York: Oxford
University Press; 1996: 390–420.
54.
Intentional releases: Lifting the veil of secrecy. In: The Report of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation
Experiments. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996: 317–353.
55.
Moynihan DP. Secrecy. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press; 1998.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
532
