Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
687
Chapter 21
RELIGIOUS AND CULTURAL
CONSIDERATIONS IN MILITARY
HEALTHCARE
DAVID M. DEDONATO, MDIV, MA, BCC*; AND RICK D. MATHIS, JD, MDIV, MA†
INTRODUCTION
THE IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING DIVERSITY
RELIGIOUS CONSIDERATIONS IN HEALTHCARE PROVISION
Religious Culture’s Shaping of America and American Healthcare
Religious Culture’s Influence on Western Medicine
Religious Beliefs and Values of the American Patient
Some General and Specific Religious Considerations
CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS IN HEALTHCARE PROVISION
A General Overview
Significance of Cultural World Views
Cultural Concepts of Health
Healing Systems
The Culture of Military Healthcare
WELLNESS AND ILLNESS: TWO OTHER RELIGIOUS-CULTURAL VIEWS
Judaism
Islam
ADDRESSING CONFLICTS ARISING FROM RELIGIOUS AND CULTURAL
CONSIDERATIONS
The Potential for Conflict
Some Caregiver Guidelines
CONCLUSION
*Lieutenant Colonel (Retired), Chaplain Corps, United States Army; formerly, Senior Chaplain Clinician and Clinical Ethicist, Dwight David
Eisenhower Army Medical Center, Fort Gordon, Georgia, and Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, DC; currently, Director of
Pastoral Care, Lexington Medical Center, West Columbia, South Carolina 29169
†Lieutenant Colonel, Chaplain Corps, United States Army; currently, Staff Chaplain, 18th Military Police Brigade, Mannheim, Germany,
HHC 18th MP Bde, Unit 29708, APO AE 09028; formerly, Chaplain-Clinical Ethicist and Chief, Ethics Consultation Service, Walter Reed
Army Medical Center, Washington, DC
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
688
Aaron Bohrod, 1944
Military Necessity
Pont L’Abbe, Normandy, World War II
First elements of the 90th Infantry Division saw action on D-Day, 6 June 1944, on Utah Beach, Normandy. The remainder entered combat 10 June, cutting across the Merderet River to take Pont l’Abbe in heavy fighting. Once it was
secured, it was used as a staging area. This painting depicts the use of a religious structure as a communications pole
to coordinate the ongoing action in the area, thus the title “Military Necessity.”
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
689
INTRODUCTION
ment. Although she is being treated in a country where autonomy is respected and informed consent is required as a
condition for treatment, for Leah, exercising her autonomy
by giving an informed consent might require her to reject
the teachings of her religion. 1(pp83–84)
Two very different concepts of what ought to take
precedence in deciding to proceed with the needed
lifesaving radiation and surgery are at work in this
situation. One concept is that of honoring and following the patient’s religious-cultural beliefs (ie,
putting the beliefs of the patient before the profesOver the past several decades, medicine has
moved away from viewing the patient simply as a
biological mechanism in need of “repair” and toward a more complete view of the patient as a person with a health need who is also part of a complex social system. A significant portion of who that
patient “is” comes from the patient’s religious and
cultural background. Most of the time, religious and
cultural considerations in patient care decisions
seem invisible, indeed almost “hidden,” in cases
where the healthcare professionals, the patient, and
his or her loved ones substantially agree about the
appropriate therapy, treatment, or outcome to be
sought. However, their presence may be more
readily observed when the parties disagree because
of differences in their religious beliefs and cultural
values. It is easier to see these differences when they
are succinctly stated by the participants. Therefore,
this chapter will begin with a case in which there is
a clear statement of these differences and what the
patient’s family believes must occur as a result. By
understanding the more obvious cases, the physician will, it is hoped, become more attuned to the
less obvious, but nonetheless significant, situations
that involve differing views regarding what is
“best” for a patient.
The following case illustrates the dilemma that can
occur when differing religious beliefs and cultural
values clash in the patient–physician relationship.
Case Study 21-1: What Should Leah Be Told? Leah,
an 18-year-old Israeli girl (similar to the girl shown in Figure 21-1), is diagnosed with clear cell adenocarcinoma
of the vagina. Her family is ultraorthodox. She is being
seen in a prominent American hospital because of its reputation as the best in the world at treating clear cell cancer. The prescribed treatment for her would be a course
of radiation therapy to shrink her tumor and then a hysterectomy. Her father does not want her to be told that
she will be sterile because she was recently engaged and
the wedding will be very soon.
Jewish religious law will not permit a woman known to
be infertile to marry, except to a man who is infertile or to a
widower with children. Leah’s father says that “if she needs
treatment, give it to her. We will explain the infertility later.”
When told that she would need to give informed consent to
the radiation treatment and surgery, her father replies, “but
she doesn’t understand any of this. Look, tell her you’re
taking her uterus out. Just don’t explain what it means. She
won’t understand, she’s very naive.”1(pp81–82)
Comment: Traditional Jewish belief does not recognize
patient autonomy. According to Judaic teachings, life comes
from and belongs to God. Treatment that can preserve life,
as in this case, is obligatory and one cannot refuse the treatFig. 21-1. “Mina.” Oil on canvas by Raphael Soyer, 1932.
This portrait of a young Jewish woman, painted almost
70 years ago, captures the vulnerability of “Mina.” A
father’s desire to protect a daughter is common to all
societies, but is particularly strong in a patriarchal culture such as Judaism. Reproduced with permission from
Forum Gallery, New York.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
690
sional requirements of the physician). The other concept is that of following accepted American medical-legal-ethical practice concerning the patient’s
right to make an informed consent, even if that right
of informed consent is alien and distressing to the
patient. Although this particular dilemma is perhaps
more clearly enunciated than many, it nonetheless
is indicative of the ethical dilemmas in the provision of medical care in an increasingly multicultural
patient base.
Medical, nursing, social work, and clinical pastoral journals have all reported and discussed anecdotal accounts of ethical dilemmas faced by
healthcare professionals, their patients, and family
members as they all seek what they believe to be
the best solution to a medical problem. Within the
last few years the literature has also included discussion focused specifically on the patient’s religious beliefs and cultural values in particular cases,
while there has been only limited discussion of the
healthcare professional’s personal religious beliefs
and cultural values. There has been, however, no
discussion of religious and cultural considerations
as they affect military healthcare specifically.
THE IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING DIVERSITY
Knowledge of religious and cultural considerations can help all healthcare professionals to:
• realize that religiously and culturally
grounded concepts, values, and interpretations differ about what are appropriate conduct and good outcomes within the therapeutic relationship;
• become aware of their own personal and professional religious beliefs and cultural values
as healthcare professionals and how these
values influence their perceptions of (and
actions and interactions with) patients; and
• become sensitized to the specific cultural
and religious values, beliefs, and actions
that affect patient care decisions.
Having an awareness of the influence of religious
and cultural factors in healthcare is essential to
American healthcare and especially to military
healthcare, given the military’s worldwide deployment. A military healthcare professional will find
such knowledge helpful in providing medical care
to persons of a non-American or non-Western religion or culture, whether at home or in a distant part
of the world. This is particularly true where religious
and cultural considerations pose significant value
conflicts between military healthcare professionals
and patients and their families.
This chapter’s discussion of religious and cultural considerations in military healthcare will explore religious considerations and cultural considerations in general, as well as examining how these
EXHIBIT 21-1
DOES HEALTHCARE POSSESS RELIGIOUS VALUES THAT AFFECT PATIENT-CARE
DECISIONS?
Thinkers disagree about the impact of religious values on patient-care decisions. Callahan would answer that
religious values do not impact patient care, arguing that, “for all the steady interest of some physicians in
religion and medicine, the discipline of medicine itself is now as resolutely secular as any that can be found in
our society. It is a true child of the Enlightenment.”1(p3) Geisler, however, argues that if the discipline of medicine substantially embraces secular humanism, then secular humanism’s significant value orientations qualify
under some definitions as a personal or corporate religious belief or creed. 2(p174) Geisler argues that secular
humanism, as a world view, contains distinctive value orientations that are both cultural and religious in nature. In demonstrating his position, he contrasts a traditional Judeo-Christian world view with a secular humanistic world view. In the former, there is a creator, man is specially created, God is sovereign over life, sanctity-of-life is more important than quality of life, and ends do not justify means. In a secular humanistic world
view, there is no creator, man evolved from animals, man is sovereign over life, quality of life is more important
than sanctity-of-life, and ends do justify means.
Sources: (1) Callahan D. Religion and the secularization of bioethics. Hastings Cent Rep. 1990;20(4):Suppl. 2–4. (2) Geisler N.
Christian Ethics: Options and Issues. Grand Rapids, Mich: Baker; 1989.
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
691
considerations influence the healthcare environment, especially within the context of a military
deployment. As already alluded to, the difficult issue is first being aware of these differences, then
responding appropriately. As Kluckhohn points out,
cultural value orientations answer important human
questions about the nature and purpose of man, man’s
relationship to nature and his fellow man, and man’s
time dimensions. 2(p64) Religious value orientations
address the same questions with an additional emphasis on a person’s relationship to God.
This chapter, although at times emphasizing
medicine’s role in value conflicts, seeks overall to
encompass all military healthcare professionals. It
is neither intended to be an outlined primer of specific religious or cultural beliefs, nor an overview
of healthcare cultural anthropology, but rather describes only some of the potential conflicts posed
by religious and cultural considerations. In keeping with that philosophy, this chapter discusses only
briefly the dynamics of the individual healthcare
professional’s personal religious beliefs as they relate to patient-care decisions. Likewise, this chapter addresses indirectly the question of whether
healthcare possesses religious values or beliefs that
play a part in patient-care decisions. (Exhibit 21-1
explores in detail the disagreement between philosophers regarding this question.) Regarding
healthcare values that are arguably “religious,” this
chapter discusses them and their influence on patient-care decisions as a part of the “culture” of
healthcare.
RELIGIOUS CONSIDERATIONS IN HEALTHCARE PROVISION
For a physician to appreciate others’ religious
and cultural values, an understanding of one’s own
religious and cultural roots and their influence on
one’s thinking is essential. Though this country,
especially its military, has increasingly become
multicultural in composition and pluralistic in religious belief, there is a religious and cultural tradition that has had an effect on American medicine
and the ethics that define it. That tradition has been
defined as American moralism, which was shaped
by the Calvinist tradition brought from England by
the Puritans in the 1600s and the Jansenist tradition brought from Ireland by Irish-Catholic immigrants in the 1830s. 3(pp114–115)
Religious Culture’s Shaping of America and
American Healthcare
The early immigrants to this country did a great
deal to shape America as it is today. In order to
understand these influences, it is necessary to look
at religious traditions in America and how they
gave rise to American moralism.
America’s Religious Traditions
Calvinism, as practiced by the Puritans, professed that believers are to plunge into secular
world activities with a pure heart. Calvinists believed that a clear, unambiguous perception of
God’s commandments and an unquestioning, voluntary dedication to their observation would protect them from contamination as they moved to
subdue nature and society to Divine Governance. 4(p23)
Through the revival movements (Figure 21-2) following the American Revolution and in the post–
Civil-War period, this moralism took on the task of
ascertaining the sins of the community that needed
reforming and saving the Western migration from
barbarism. A profoundly emotional fundamentalism emerged, with overwhelming emphasis on
soul-saving, personal experience, and individual
prayer. 5(p13),6(p120)
Jansenism, spiritually inspired by the theology
of Saint Augustine in that humanity had to be kept
in check by penitential vigor, is a Catholic cousin
of Calvinism. Jansenists opposed “probabilism”—
a rule that allowed a person whose conscience is
troubled about the right course of action to choose
and act on any well-founded opinion that is “certain” or, at least, “more probably” correct. Like its
Protestant counterpart, Jansenist revivalism spread
throughout American Catholicism in the latter
1800s.
Both traditions, though different, had in their
common, recurring themes3(pp118,120):
• insistence on clear, unambiguous moral
principles, known to all persons of good
faith;
• denial of the possibility of moral paradox
or irreconcilable conflict of principles;
• avoidance, as much as possible, of detailed
examination of exceptions to principles and
rules;
• reduction of complex moral problems into
simple, overarching ideals that linked together issues that, viewed from a more discerning viewpoint, appear distinct (eg, for
Protestants, sex education and pornography;
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
692
for Catholics, contraception and abortion);
• affirmation of absolute moral principles,
from which any departure must be counted
as sinful, making little or no room for justifiable exceptions (although the contents of
those principles varied between the two traditions);
• assertion of the Ten Commandments as
dominant; and
• adherence to cherished and strictly ordered
plans of life.
American Moralism
What emerged from these common, recurring
themes of the Calvinist and Jansenist traditions was
a pervasive American moralism that:3(p121)
• emphasized continual reliance on fundamental moral principles;
• furthered the tendency to remove a moral
problem from the actual circumstances of
moral action;
• declared that moral principles in themselves must be affirmed—exceptions and
excuses must not be considered because
such considerations would distract from the
principle itself;
• maintained that antithetical categories that
sought boundary systems and patterns of
control would affirm order against disorder; and
• insisted on a stream of thinking that deeply
believed in clear, unambiguous moral principles, the ability of common sense to grasp
these principles, and the importance of the
observance of these principles for the common good of the community.
Although modern America has forgotten about
its moralistic sources, and “the rigidity of the Calvinist and Jansenist heritage seems to have evolved
Fig. 21-2. Converts weep and pray in this drawing of an 1836 revival meeting in the state of New York. Revival
meetings encouraged individuals to repent of their sins and to work toward reforming their communities. Reproduced with permission from LIFE, Bicentennial Issue: The 100 Events That Shaped America. 1975; 63.
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
693
into a vague tolerance for all but the most outrageous violations,”3(p122) Jonsen maintains, “the moralism generated by [these] deep traditions, survives
in the form, if not the content of the American
mentality.”3(p122) The remnants of American moralism not only affect the ways Americans think today; they have greatly influenced American medical ethics as well. Jonsen believes that the original
impetus for American medical ethics came from
American moralism—which helped to bring the
chaos of the new scientific medicine into the order
of moral principle. 3(p126)
Jonsen cites several examples of science’s pursuit of principle. Paul Ramsey’s book, Patient as
Person,7 written by a man steeped in Calvinism, is,
according to Jonsen, one moralist’s attempt to subjugate the new chaotic features of contemporary
medical science to moral principles. Other attempts
to ensure morality in science have been made by
groups of individuals selected for their moral authority. For example, the Totally Artificial Heart
Assessment Panel8 assessed ethical and moral implications and guidelines in using implantable artificial hearts. The National Commission for the
Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and
Behavioral Research studied the principles governing biomedical research. Their work resulted in the
Belmont Report,9 which applied bioethical principles
to research activities. The President’s Commission
on the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine10 studied principles governing the care of the terminally
ill and patients in the persistent vegetative state.
Probably the most enduring contribution that the
American moralism movement has produced is
“principlism”—the four principles of American biomedical ethics: autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice. 11 Only in the last two decades
have other medical ethical models arisen to challenge
the principle-based model. Clinical models, based
on practical medical considerations, are espoused
by Jonsen and colleagues12 and Fletcher and colleagues. 13 Jonsen and Toulmin, in The Abuse of Casuistry, propose classical casuistry as principlism’s
chief opponent. 14 Pellegrino and Thomasma15 advocate a virtue ethic that focuses on right behavior by
physicians. Fry16 proposes an ethic of care that requires a moral point of view of persons and establishes moral commitments that naturally emerge
from context of the professional–patient relationship. (Chapter 2, Theories of Medical Ethics, discusses these and other models in detail.) Medicine
in the United States today is based on ethics that
reflects a secular fundamentalism that: (a) describes
the same absolutism, same dichotomous world of
good and bad, right and wrong as seen by the moralists, but shorn of religious rationale and religious
sanctions; and (b) has the same obedience to the law
but without the sanctions of eternal reward and
punishment. 17(pp27–28)
The work of ethicists can no longer be expected to
uphold the clear and unambiguous principles of
American moralism. Nevertheless, there is still a
tension between those who find comfort in holding to the certitude of moralism and those who realize the ambiguity that pervades many ethical dilemmas that exist at the bedside. 17(p31)
Religious Culture’s Influence on Western
Medicine
American moralism has not only affected the
evolution of basic principles and institutions in
America; it has also greatly influenced the Western
world, its practice of medicine, and the development and application of medical technology.
Pellegrino asserts that
the transcultural challenge of accepting what medical knowledge has to offer in light of a particular
culture’s values and beliefs, is vastly complicated
because medical science and technology, as well as
the ethics designed to deal with its impact, are
Western in origin. 18(p191)
Western cultures differ from other cultures in how
empirical science is conducted, in what constitutes
ethical behavior, and in the political systems that
guide and adjudicate the practice of medicine. Military healthcare professionals, because of their role
in worldwide medical deployments, especially need
to be aware of these differences.
In the Western world science is both empirical
and experimental. It pursues objectivity and seeks
the quantification of experience. It is driven by a
common desire to gather information, share that
knowledge, and build on it for future study or practical use. Science is both basic and applied; basic
when it seeks to understand how or why something
is, applied when it seeks a solution to a specific
problem. Other cultures may be less inclined to
aggressively uncover nature’s mysteries, less obsessed with the need for experimental verification,
and more strongly drawn by the spiritual and qualitative dimensions of life.
Western ethics, especially medical ethics, is principle-based, analytical, rationalistic, dialectical, and
often secular in spirit. As previously noted, the
United States as a country is multicultural and pluMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
694
ralistic. These American characteristics have increasingly influenced other Western nations. Other
cultures, however, are not as multicultural and pluralistic. The ethical systems of those cultures may
be less dialectical, analytical, logical, or linguistic
in character, and be more sensitive to family and
community consensus than to autonomy, and more
virtue based than principle based.
These distinctly American characteristics, the
result of both past history and current demographics, result in Western political systems that tend to
be liberal, democratic, individualistic, and governed
by law. The political systems in other cultures may
be more attuned to authority, tradition, ritual, and
religion. Some of these are more comfortable with,
and more responsive to, the decentralization of decision making and more tolerant of social stratification and inequality. 18(pp191–192)
Pellegrino’s observation, focused at the macrocultural level, suggests serious conflicts at the individual microcultural level. There, healthcare professionals steeped in Western healthcare cultural
values interact with patients whose cultural orientations may or may not be the same. As the power
and influence of Western medical science and technology expand throughout the world, the conflicts
with different belief systems will only increase. With
American military physicians routinely being deployed globally in military and humanitarian missions, the necessity for meaningful interaction and
a developed sensitivity to different cultural beliefs
is greatly increased—a need generally overlooked
or at least underappreciated.
Religious Beliefs and Values of the American
Patient
Regardless of the culture, the degree of modernization, or the policies or laws of a government, religious beliefs and values strongly influence many
persons’ lives, both in America and abroad. One can
gain a clearer understanding of a person’s present
behavior or viewpoint by examining his religious
beliefs, both past and present. Sometimes a person’s
actions or beliefs are readily articulated in terms of
a current religious belief. However, sometimes individuals may not be aware that the basis for their
present behavior or viewpoint is a religious belief
that they previously held or that influenced them
earlier in life. In either situation, one may gain a
clearer understanding of others by examining the
religious beliefs and values that influence their behaviors, as well as the historical relationship between medicine and religion, and the little understood relationship between religious belief and
health.
Religious Beliefs and Values
Religious beliefs and values provide a framework
for understanding life and defining its limits. This
framework is passed from one generation to the
next through religious training and ceremony (Figure 21-3). Religion helps people understand their
mortality. It develops an awareness of external conditions about which they can do nothing—conditions that circumscribe their existence and must be
attended to if they are to continue to exist. These
are the empirical conditions needed for the development and maintenance of all humans. Religion
also shapes and helps people interpret the historical and cultural circumstances in which they are
born and live, as well as many things about all
people as individuals. These are the character and
personality traits, proclivities, and cognitive tendencies that distinguish humans from all other
species. 19(p127) Thus, religion describes and explains
the human condition at its most fundamental level.
Religion also provides a person with a unique
concept of personal identity in the fullest sense. It
helps people to understand themselves and the
world around them in a more complete and satisFig. 21-3. An Orthodox Christian baptism. Father Georgii
Studyonov baptizes a child in his church in southwest
Moscow. Although officially banned by the former Soviet
government for almost 75 years, religion remained an
important part of the lives of many Russians. Ceremonies
such as this one, performed here as it has been performed
for centuries, help ensure the continuity of religious tradition through the most difficult of times. Reproduced with
permission from National Geographic. Feb 1991;36-37.
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
695
fying way. Through religion they realize that their
actions may have effects beyond their control in
relation to others, the actions of those others, and
subsequent events. People can, indeed must, live
with others in a world that is not always friendly,
is sometimes indifferent, and may be even hostile.
The pervasive, supremely important integrating
and reconciling function that religious beliefs and
values accomplish in a person’s life often gives
sense to the meaning of that life—a sense that might
otherwise never be found. To better understand
how this “sense to the meaning of life” can influence patients in other countries, it is helpful to first
explore its impact on patients in America. By becoming aware of the prevalence of religious beliefs
and values in patients seen stateside, military
healthcare professionals can become more attuned to
variations on these common themes in other cultures.
A casual observer of contemporary American
culture, with its emphasis on speed, immediate
gratification, and acquisition of material goods,
might be surprised to learn that Americans are a
highly religious people. In studies of Gallup surveys, 95% of Americans said that they believe in
God,20 72% agree or strongly agree with the statement, “My religious faith is the most important influence in my life,”20 66% consider religion to be
most important or very important in their lives,20
57% pray (Figure 21-4) at least once a day,20 and 40%
have attended church or synagogue within the past
week20 (a figure that has remained remarkably constant in more than 20 Gallup surveys conducted
between 1939 and 1993).
Americans also frequently participate in religious
healing activities. Although the data vary somewhat
from region to region, the overall picture that
emerges is one of religion playing an active role in
healthcare issues for a considerable portion of the
American population. In a survey of 586 adults in
Richmond, Virginia, in the mid-1980s, 14% of the
sample attributed physical healings (most commonly viral infections, cancers, back problems, and
fractures), as well as help with emotional problems,
to prayer or divine intervention. 21 In another recent
survey of 325 adults, 30% reported praying regularly for healing and for health maintenance; consulting a physician was inversely correlated with
the patient’s frequency of prayer and belief in the
efficacy of prayer. 22 In a study of 207 patients in a
family practice clinic, 56% reported that they had
watched faith healers on television, 21% had attended a faith-healing service, 15% knew someone
who had been so healed, and 6% reported that they
had themselves been healed by faith healers. 23 In a
survey of 203 hospitalized patients in North Carolina and Pennsylvania, 94% believed that spiritual
health is as important as physical health, 73%
prayed daily, 58% reported having strong religious
beliefs, and 42% had attended faith-healing services. 24
In summary, Americans are indeed a highly religious people. Whether or not they attend church,
Americans’ religious beliefs and values are an integral part of who they are and what they are likely
to do, or to not do. This is important for the healthcare professional to remember as he treats the patient
not as a biological entity with a specific dysfunction, but rather as a whole person who is part of a
complex social network. This relationship between
religious beliefs and values, on the one hand, and
health and healing, on the other, has not been exclusive to individuals. The relationship has existed
between the professions of medicine and religion
as well.
Fig. 21-4. A. Durer: “Praying Hands.” Great Ages of Man:
Age of Christianity. Prayer, a central tenet of many religions, is increasingly being recognized as an important
aspect of health and healing. Reproduced with permission from Corbis, Inc.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
696
The Historical Relationship Between Medicine
and Religion
Medicine and religion have worked hand-inhand in the process of healing for thousands of
years because suffering is universal and mysterious. Suffering necessitates healers to witness, understand, explain, and relieve that suffering. 25 These
medical and religious practitioners have generally
enjoyed an important and respected role in society.
In ancient societies (as well as in some contemporary primitive societies), illness was perceived as
primarily a spiritual problem. Religious and medical authority was often vested in the same person
(eg, an Aaronic priest) who might himself become
an object of worship (eg, Imhotep, Asclepius, Jesus
Christ). From the early Christian era through the
Reformation, the linkage between medicine and religion remained close. The first hospitals were founded
in monasteries, and the missionary movement
linked physical healing with spiritual conversion.
By the 17th century, challenges to church authority and the rise of empirical science created rifts
between medicine and religion. Science claimed the
body (and later, the “mind,” or cognitive processes)
as its domain, while religion held onto the soul. As
science advanced the knowledge of the heretofore
unknown, condemnatory critiques of religion arose:
“the opium of the people”26 (Marx), “a universal
obsessional neurosis”27 (Freud), and “equivalent to
irrational thinking and emotional disturbance”28
(Ellis). Early Western modern science, in its belief
that it could ultimately solve all health problems,
appeared to have supplanted religion. However, by
the late 20th century, a growing disillusionment
with modern science’s limitations coupled with
more holistic concepts of health and suffering
opened up the possibility of a rapprochement between
medicine and religion. Nowhere is this rapprochement seen more clearly than in the willingness of
scientists to investigate those religious beliefs that
previously had been dismissed as irrational, selffulfilling prophecies.
Documented Medical and Psychological Benefits
of Religious Beliefs
A body of research correlates religious belief with
improved physical, emotional, and behavioral wellbeing, making a strong case for the incorporation
of religious and spiritual values into medical treatment regimens. Research has examined areas as
diverse as substance abuse, grief reactions, general
health, general well-being, and survival rates for
various illnesses. In each area, religion has been
found to have a profound and positive effect for
those who believe. These research studies have been
carefully constructed and have withstood the rigor
of the scientific research model, including statistical analysis.
The question of how religious commitment might
affect substance abuse has been the subject of several studies. For example, of 1,014 males matriculating between 1948 and 1964 at Johns Hopkins
Medical School, 13% met criteria for alcohol abuse.
The strongest predictor of subsequent alcoholism
during medical school was a lack of religious affiliation, followed by regular use of alcohol, past history of alcohol-related difficulty, non-Jewish ancestry, and a number of other criteria. 29(p332)
Of 248 men (87% Mexican-American) with opiate
addiction treated at a Public Health Service hospital from 1964 to 1967, 11% subsequently enrolled in
a long-term religiously based program. These patients
were significantly more likely (45% vs. 5%) to abstain
from opioids for 1 year after the program. 30(pp74–75)
The researchers note that “[f]rom the standpoint of
attractiveness or acceptability to opioid users, however, religious programs do not appear especially
effective. Admissions to these programs equal only
3% of all admissions to treatment and only 11% of
all subjects in the study.”30(p75) They did add that
“[a]lthough religious programs seem to attract only
a small minority of opioid users, they are an effective
alternative to conventional therapies for some.”30(p80)
There were 2,969 participants in the National
Institute of Mental Health Epidemiologic Catchment
Area survey (1983–1984) in North Carolina, which
lasted 6 months. The researchers found that “those
who attended church at least weekly … [had a] likelihood of abusing or being dependent on alcohol
[that] was less than one-third (29 percent) the rate
among those who attended less frequently.”31(p229)
“[T]hose who prayed and read the Bible at least
several times a week … [had a] likelihood of having had an alcohol disorder in the past six months
[that] was less than half (42 percent) the rate for the
rest of the sample.”31(p229) The researchers concluded
“[t]he data presented here do not lend themselves
to interpretations about the cause of the relationships between religious variables and alcohol use,
for two reasons. One, the data are cross-sectional
in nature, and two, although our analyses were controlled for a number of basic demographic and
health variables, it was not possible to account for
the full range of variables in which religious behaviors and alcohol use may be enmeshed.”31(p231) Nonetheless, the data raise interesting questions for furReligious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
697
ther research.
Another area of interest to researchers was that
of adjusting and coping during and after long-term
terminal illness of a loved one. In a study of 145
parents of children who had died of cancer, 80%
reported receiving comfort from religion during the
year after the child’s death and 40% reported a
strengthening of their religious commitment during that year,32(p226) which was positively associated
with better physiological adjustment, emotive adjustment, and perceived helpfulness of religion. 32(p233)
The study authors concluded: “Basically, it appears
that religious commitment is both a cause and a consequence of the process of adjustment to bereavement. Both segments of the analysis revealed a
stronger religious commitment arising out of an
individual’s attempts to cope with the death. …
With regard to religious commitment as a determinant of adjustment, the qualitative segment of the
analysis found that the likelihood that parents
would derive comfort from the theodicy of purposive death was increased if they also displayed an
especially strong religious faith.”32(p237)
In a 1985 study of 65 low-income elderly women
who had one or more stressful medical problems
within the previous year, the most frequent coping
responses for handling medical illness were prayer,
selected by 59 of the respondents (91%) and “thinking of God or religious beliefs,” selected by 56 of
the respondents (86%). 33(p44) In addition, in a 1988
survey of 62 caregivers of Alzheimer’s disease and
cancer patients, religious faith was positively associated with a positive emotional state and negatively associated with emotional distress. 34(p334)
Many religions worldwide believe that the prayer
of others, as well as one’s own beliefs, can aid in
overcoming many difficulties, including health
problems. Research supports these beliefs. Religious
and spiritual commitment and belief is indeed correlated to physical symptoms and general health
outcomes. In a 1992 study of 172 students enrolled
in Christian faith groups and 127 unaffiliated student controls, the faith group had statistically significant better perceived health; more positive affect; higher satisfaction; fewer emergency room,
physician, walk-in clinic, and dentist visits; and
fewer hospital days than the unaffiliated group. 35(p68)
Among 1,344 outpatients in Glasgow, Scotland,
those who participated in a religious activity at least
monthly were less likely to report physical, mental, and social stressors associated with daily living after controlling for age and gender. 36(p684) In
addition, in a prospective study of 2,812 elderly
persons in New Haven, Connecticut, religiosity was
inversely related to subsequent disability and directly related to improved functional ability. 37
Religious and spiritual commitment and belief
also have positive correlation to one’s perceived
general well-being and quality of life. Among 560
telephone survey respondents in Akron, Ohio, general life satisfaction was strongly correlated with
religious satisfaction, closeness with God, prayer
experience, frequency of church attendance, and
church activities. 38(p267) Among 2,164 persons in the
National Quality of Life Survey, feelings of being
worthwhile were significantly related to the importance of faith,39(p300) church membership,39(p302) and
church attendance. 39(p302) Using the same data from
the National Quality of Life Survey, satisfaction
from religion was found to be highly correlated with
marital satisfaction, and satisfaction with family
life, as well as general affect. 40 And, among 997 respondents to the 1988 General Social Survey, church
attendance was positively correlated with life
satisfaction. 41(p86)
Finally, a series of studies examined the effects
of religious and spiritual commitment and belief on
survival. The largest of these studies surveyed
91,909 individuals who lived in Washington County,
Maryland. The researchers compared persons with
various diseases who had died of those diseases and
then examined the frequency of church attendance
(once or more a week vs. less than once a week)
among the total group, over a 3-year period. The
study results found that those who attended church
once or more per week had 74% fewer deaths due
to cirrhosis, 56% fewer deaths due to emphysema,
53% fewer suicides, and 50% fewer deaths due to
coronary artery disease than those who attended
less than once per week. 42(p669) In a prospective cohort study of 4,725 individuals in Alameda County,
California, those who were church members had
lower mortality rates than others independent of
socioeconomic status and health behaviors (eg,
smoking, drinking, physical inactivity, obesity). 43(p189)
In a retrospective cohort study of 522 Seventh Day
Adventist deaths in the Netherlands from 1968 to
1977, Adventists were found to have an additional
life expectancy of 9 years for men and 4 years for
women when compared with the general population.
Adventists had lower rates of overall mortality (45%
of expected), neoplasms (50% of expected), and cardiovascular diseases (41% of expected). 44(pp456–457)
Mormons also enjoy unusually good health, with
cancer and heart disease rates less than one half
those of the general population. Furthermore, the
rate of cancer varies inversely with the degree to
which the individual adheres to church teaching
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
698
(including dietary restrictions) and participates in
church activities, with highly religious Mormons
experiencing one half the rate of cancers of less adherent members of the faith. 45(pp252,256)
There are other studies that show equally impressive relationships between persons’ religious and
spiritual beliefs and their physical, mental, and
emotional well-being. These studies show that, regardless of a particular patient’s diagnosis or prognosis, to ignore or discount a patient’s religious or
spiritual belief could omit a key element in a treatment regimen that could enhance returning that
patient to a healthy state.
Some General and Specific Religious Considerations
As American healthcare professionals provide
care for an ever-widening spectrum of patients, it
has been shown that one can expect to encounter
patients with varying degrees of religious belief that
influence their healthcare values. This religious
worldview may often be the framework for persons’
self-worth, their view of the outside world, and
their interaction with key people and situations in
their lives. Developing an appreciation for the religious component of this framework may be a valuable key to understanding a patient’s approach to
health, illness, and how the patient will cope with
medical treatment with all of its complexities.
Major Dimensions of Religion
Faulkner and DeJong46(p354) propose five major
dimensions of religion, each of which can be of
unique significance to one’s health and illness.
These are:
(1)
Experiential: The religious person will at
some point in life achieve some direct
knowledge of ultimate reality or will experience religious emotion (be “born
again,” “come into full knowledge,” and
be “slain in the spirit” are terms basic to
fundamentalist Christian denominations).
(2)
Ritualistic: Religious practices that are expected of followers include worship, prayer,
sacraments, and fasting (Roman Catholics,
Lutherans, Episcopalians).
(3)
Ideological: These are the set of beliefs to
which a religion’s followers must adhere
in order to call themselves members.
(4)
Intellectual: The specific acts, beliefs, or
explanations that members are to be informed about are called many things, to
include: the basic tenets, the sacred writings, and the scriptures. These are written
down, and available for study and discussion (eg, Christians—Bible, Jews—Torah,
Muslims—Koran).
(5)
Consequential: Religiously defined standards of conduct are religious tenets that
specify what followers’ attitudes and behaviors should be as a consequence of their
actions (eg, the Biblical Ten Commandments, Five Islamic fundamentals, Jewish
social and religious laws).
Expression of Religious Beliefs
There are many ways in which religious beliefs
are expressed or demonstrated. Among these are
prayer, holy days, religious symbols, garments, and
dietary practices. 47 Although the specific guidelines
for these expressions may vary from religion to religion, they all are important aspects of religious
beliefs. And, as the preceding discussion of the
documented medical and psychological benefits of
religion has so aptly demonstrated, these expressions are a valuable adjunct to the overall healing
process. By understanding and accepting the expression of these beliefs, the healthcare staff can also
be aware of those expressions that may be detrimental to the health of the patient, especially certain dietary practices. Again, the emphasis is on the
patient in a social context, to include religious beliefs and their expression.
Prayer. Prayer can be a great source of emotional
strength and comfort for those who are ill and also
for their family and friends. Prayer can be formal,
following a specified liturgy (eg, Roman Catholic,
Episcopalian) or as a tenet of faith according to set
rules. Devout Muslims must pray to Mecca, a holy
city in Saudi Arabia, five times a day. Traditionally,
they pray on a special prayer rug placed on the floor
and facing in the direction of Mecca. Many Muslims in this country do this in the privacy of their
homes or away from the public. In the case of a devout Muslim who is hospitalized, it is not unusual
to have his prayer rug in the room so that he can
engage in this ritual at the prescribed times. Prayer
can also be informal or spontaneous, such as those
that are offered at the patient’s bedside by members of visiting clergy. Many devout Christians (eg,
African-Americans, fundamentalist-believers) view
religion as an essential and integral part of life. They
believe that God, the source of good health and
healing, can cure disease and heal injury. To receive
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
699
this healing they must pray and have the faith that
these prayers will be answered. This may also involve the presence of family members and friends
in a prayer circle in the patient’s hospital room or
in the hospital chapel. It is not unusual for them to
ask their healthcare professionals to join them in
prayer, because they view their healthcare professionals’ talents and skills as being under God’s
guidance and use. Health care professionals should
be sensitive to these expressions of faith.
Holy Days. Holy days, which vary from religion
to religion, are days devoted to participating in religious activities while often limiting nonreligious
activities. Thus, depending on the religion, holy
days may be days that are not well-suited to routine medical procedures, or may be problematic in
the treatment of certain diseases. For Muslims,
Ramadan (a period of 30 days around February or
March) requires periods of fasting from sunup to
sundown. For many Orthodox Jews, the Sabbath
(from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday) is a
time to spend with family and to worship God. On
the Sabbath, work of any kind is prohibited, including driving, using the telephone, handling money,
and even pressing an elevator button. The only law
that is higher than observing the Sabbath is the law
that requires everything possible be done to save a
life. As these two examples demonstrate, there is a
great deal of diversity between various religions in
their holy days. It is obviously not possible for
healthcare professionals to know every separate
religion and its specific holy days. However, by
being aware that there are various holy days for
different religions, with specific restrictions, healthcare professionals can better plan with their patients
the best course of action for treatment. This process need not consume a great deal of time, but it
can do a great deal of good for the patient.
Religious Symbols. In hospitals, one of the admission procedures is often the removal of all personal
items of value from patients, including jewelry,
watches, and so forth, for safekeeping. Many diagnostic tests require the removal of any items that
might interfere with the procedure. In the event of
a surgical procedure, all items are removed from
the patient’s body before the operation to ensure a
sterile environment for the patient (ie, jewelry) or
to prevent a medical problem (ie, removal of false
teeth). However, a number of religious faiths have
symbols that have special meaning to those who
wear them. Roman Catholics may carry or wear a
rosary or wear a medallion. Jews may wear a Star
of David on a necklace around their necks. Christians
may wear a cross. Hindus may wear sacred threads
around their necks or arms. Native-American Indians may carry medicine bundles. Mexican children
may wear a bit of red ribbon. Mediterranean peoples
may wear a special charm (eg, mustard seed in a
circle or a ram’s horn) or a chain. Healthcare professionals unfamiliar with these religious symbols
should learn about their significance to the patient.
If, because of medical procedures, the symbol must
be removed, a full explanation of the reason may
need to be given to the patient. Sometimes an accommodation can be made to keep the symbol in
the patient’s possession or close by so that the patient can derive the symbol’s benefit.
Garments. At the same time that items of value
are placed in safekeeping for the patient, the patient is also told to change into a hospital issued
gown after completely removing all street clothing.
However, some religions have prescribed particular garments for wear by their believers. Men of
certain Jewish sects wear a prayer shawl (tallit)
underneath their outer garments, though more than
likely this garment is worn as an outer garment only
when prayer is offered. A Mormon adult wears a
special type of “garment,” which resembles shortsleeved long underwear that ends just above the
knee. Usually the garment may be removed to facilitate care in a hospital, but some Mormons, particularly the elderly, may not wish to part with the
garment, which symbolizes covenants or promises
the person has made with God and signifies God’s
protection. Where complete removal is not agreed
to, it may be possible to adjust the positioning of
the garment to allow medical care while still addressing the patient’s religious beliefs.
Dietary Practices. Of all of the religious expressions, dietary practices are of the greatest concern
to the medical professional. Whereas the other religious expressions generally only affect the delivery of patient care, some dietary practices affect
patient health and outcome. Having noted that, it is
important that the healthcare professional distinguish
between those practices that require modification
of hospital routine and those that are hazardous to
patient health. For instance, both Muslims and Jews
are forbidden by their religions to eat pork. This
prohibition also extends to many foods that contain pork products such as ham or bacon fat. These
prohibitions can be readily accommodated by the
dietetic staff. Other foods can be dangerous. Dates,
a favorite food of many Arabs, are very high in potassium, which must be strictly limited for patients
suffering from renal problems. In some Arab countries, however, food deprivation is considered a
precursor to illness, and to deprive an Arab of dates
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
700
would be viewed as helping to bring on an illness.
Orthodox Jews, following kosher dietary practices,
will not eat pork, shellfish and non-kosher red meat
and poultry. Mixing meat and dairy products, either in the same meal or by using the same plates,
pots, or utensils for both, is prohibited. Nonreligious food restrictions can also create problems.
Some ethnic groups will eat only hot or cold foods,
depending on the seasons. The hot and cold are
qualities, not temperatures. These foods, which
make them “cold” inside their bodies in the winter
or “hot” inside their bodies in the summer, are to be
avoided if these patients are to develop appetites. It
is best to ask about food preference at admission so
that arrangements can be made either for the dietary staff to meet these dietary practices or for family members to bring in the appropriate foods. Also,
each ethnic group has their own food preferences
while other ethnic groups cannot tolerate certain
foods. Many Asians like rice with every meal but
are lactose intolerant, as are many African-Americans and Native Americans. Asian diets are generally very high in sodium but low in fats. MexicanAmericans tend to use a lot of salt and fats in their
cooking. Either of these ethnic cooking styles could
be problematic for hypertensive patients. Thus it is
important to explore the dietary practices of all patients, accommodating those that can be, and explaining the medical reasons for those that cannot be accommodated during the hospital stay. If the healthcare
professional has been open and accepting of these
various religious expressions, the patient is more
likely to respond when queried about specific dietary
needs and more likely to cooperate with hospital dietary staff. However, if members of the medical staff,
including the attending physicians, have indicated
that the patient simply has to eat whatever the hospital provides, and brush off any protests to the contrary, there is the distinct possibility that family members will sneak in foods that may indeed be harmful
to the patient. By understanding that the patient has
religious beliefs, and religious expressions, the benefit of these beliefs can be incorporated into the healing process for the patient.
CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS IN HEALTHCARE PROVISION
A General Overview
Culture can be viewed as all of those parts of life
that surround and influence people from the time
they are born. It is a vital part of why and how persons make decisions. A culture has four basic characteristics48(p10): (1) it is learned from birth through the
processes of language acquisition and socialization;
(2) it is shared by all members of the same group; it
is this sharing of cultural beliefs and patterns that
binds people together; (3) it is an adaptation to specific conditions related to environmental and technical factors and to the availability of natural resources;
and (4) it is a dynamic, ever-changing process,
passed from generation to generation.
Significance of Cultural World Views
Every society has a basic value orientation that
is shared by the bulk of its members because of early
common experiences. In general, the dominant
value orientation, or world view, of each culture
guides its members to find solutions to the following five basic human problems. 2(pp67–69)
(1)
What is man’s basic innate human nature? Is
it good, in that it is unalterable or incorruptible? Is it mixed with combinations of
good and evil where lapses are unavoidable but self-control possible? Or is it evil,
in that it is unalterable, or perfectible with
discipline?
(2)
What is man’s relationship to nature? Is there
a sense of destiny, in that persons are subjugated to nature, where fatalism and inevitability guide their endeavors? Is it viewed as
mastery, in that the natural forces are to be
overcome and be put to humankind’s use
(American)? Or do people and nature exist together in harmony as a single entity
(eg, Native Americans and Asians, who are
more likely to ignore preventative medical measures)?
(3)
What is man’s significant time dimension? Is
it centered on the past, where focus is on
ancestors (Chinese) and traditions (British)? Is it oriented to the present, in that
little attention is paid to the past and the
future is considered vague and unpredictable (Hispanic and African-Americans)?
Or is it future-oriented toward progress
and change, lacking content with the
present and viewing the past as “old-fashioned” (Americans and some Western cultures, who are more likely to stress preventative medicine)?
(4)
What is the purpose of man’s being? Is it focused on being—a spontaneous expression
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
701
of impulses and desires—or on doing—an
active striving and achieving, a competition against externally applied standards?
(5)
What is man’s relationship to his fellow man?
Is it lineal, stressing continuity through
time, heredity and kinship ties, and an ordered succession (British)? Is it collateral,
where group goals and family orientation
are the primary focus (Haitians)? Or is it
focused on the individual, with personal
autonomy and independence as primary,
authority limited, and individual, not
group, goals dominant (Americans)?
It is important to recognize that all societies are
made up of collections of individuals who reflect
to one degree or another the shared cultural heritage, or world view, of the group. Of course, individual variation within any cultural group is normal. One must be careful not to stereotype an individual simply because he comes from or belongs to
a particular society or culture. Individuals share
some part of the cultural heritage of their group,
but never all of it, and they can interpret and apply
social, cultural norms in a variety of ways, especially when norms are in conflict with each other.
Individuals may evade norms, particularly norms
that are weakly enforced. In addition, some norms
are not learned by all members of a society.
Cultural Concepts of Health
The definitions of health and disease in any society are culturally influenced. When individuals
become aware of a sign or symptom that indicates
illness, they must make some choice about care,
including the decision to perhaps not seek care. The
choice is often based on the cultural characteristics
and definitions of health, illness, and disease that
these individuals accept as their own. As noted in
the introductory comments to this chapter, when
these concepts of health are similar to those of the
healthcare professional, they receive little outward
notice. The more these concepts differ from those
of the healthcare professional, however, the more
they are likely to be perceived as strange or not of
relevance to the medical situation at hand and its
successful resolution. For that very reason, this discussion of cultural concepts of health will begin
with voodoo—a belief system that many medical
personnel might find to be beyond their own cultural concepts of health.
In Haiti, voodoo priests and priestesses treat a
wide variety of problems. Clients come to them for
help with love, work, and family problems as well
as sickness. The voodoo practitioner’s first determination is whether the problem “comes from
God.” If so, it is seen as “natural”—is meant to be,
is unavoidable, and is for the greater good of the
person. No priest or priestess will interfere in such
a case. Only “supernatural” problems—those not
part of the natural order or likely to have been
caused by the spirits—will be appropriate for voodoo treatment. 49(pp50–51) Many Haitian patients receiving Western medical care will share the cultural
concepts of voodooism. Therefore, those providing
their medical care need to understand how these
concepts will influence the patient in terms of the
type of care the patient is willing to receive and how
that patient may view that care. To ignore these issues may result in the patient being offered or given
a treatment that is not allowed within this culture.
Another example of a cultural concept of health
and healing that differs from Western medicine involves the Chinese concepts of yin and yang. The
yin force in the universe represents the female aspect of nature and is characterized as the negative
pole, encompassing darkness, cold, emptiness. The
yang, or male force, is seen as the positive pole and
represents fullness, light, warmth. An imbalance of
yin and yang forces creates illness, which is interpreted as an outward expression of disharmony.
Going in and out of balance is seen as a lifelong
natural process; accordingly, no sharp line is drawn
between health and illness. Both are seen as natural and as part of a continuum. 50(pp109–110) Yin and yang
conditions are assigned to body organs and health
conditions. Yin is associated with cancer, pregnancy,
menstruation, kidney, liver, lungs, and spleen; yang
with constipation, hangover, hypertension, toothache, bladder, gallbladder, intestines, and stomach. 51 Thus, in these situations, it is important that
the medical professional and the patient discuss
these cultural differences to arrive at the best course
of treatment for the patient.
What a person recognizes as illness or disease is
also culturally influenced. Most Americans believe
that “germs” (biological processes) cause disease.
Not all cultures share that belief. Other causes of
disease include: (a) upset in body balance (Asia,
India, Spain, Latin America), (b) soul loss (some
African cultures), (c) spirit possession (Haiti, Ethiopia), (d) breach of taboo (Haiti, Caribbean cultures),
or (e) object intrusion (some African and Pacific
cultures). Again, the healthcare professional must
be aware of these cultural differences in general,
and determine whether or not the patient holds
these non-Western beliefs.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
702
Healing Systems
People throughout the world use several types
of healing “systems,”52 to include those found in the
popular sector, the professional sector, and the folk
sector. The popular sector consists of lay people who
typically activate their own healthcare by deciding
when and whom to consult, whether or not to comply, when to switch treatments, whether care is effective, and whether they are satisfied with the quality of care they have received. Individual, family,
social, and community networks often provide healing support in this type of healing system. The
professional sector consists of any professional healing group (physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors,
homeopaths, nurses, pharmacists), or other healers
(such as traditional Chinese medical healers, or the
practitioners of Ayurvedic medicine found in India).
It is the folk sector that is of greatest import to the
subject of this chapter, for it is this sector to which
many patients turn for help. A mixture of many
components, including all nonprofessional, nonbureaucratic specialties, comprise the folk sector.
These components are subdivided into secular (eg,
fortune tellers, astrologers) and sacred (eg, priests,
shamans) categories.
Western medicine’s adherence to a rational scientific-based healing tradition is in fact a minority
view in comparison with other cultures around the
world. There is, within Western medicine, an “etiology of disease,” which adheres to a scientific or
biomedical health paradigm by holding that physical and biomedical processes can be studied and
manipulated by humans and the use of a wide range
of medical technology. The majority of world cultures
advocate more non-traditional modes of healing. 53
Holistic health paradigms hold that the forces of
nature must be kept in natural balance or harmony.
Practitioners of organic healing and medicine use
drugs, surgery, and diet to treat traumatic injuries
and certain pathological conditions. Nonorganic
means use semimystical or religious practices to
influence the patient’s mind and thereby cure certain specified physical or mental states. Religious
and spiritual healing can range from scripturalbased faith healing that is found in a number of
American fundamentalist religious denominations
to the magico-religious health paradigms found in
Haiti and many African cultures where supernatural forces dominate. These paradigms differ greatly
from the scientific or biomedical health paradigm
of Western medicine with its focus on the “etiology
of disease.”
The Culture of Military Healthcare
American civilian and military healthcare are
intimately intertwined. Indeed, military healthcare
derives much of its culture from civilian healthcare.
American civilian medical and nursing schools train
most military doctors and nurses. The same professional standards usually govern both civilian and
military healthcare practice. American military hospitals voluntarily comply with accrediting standards of the Joint Commission on the Accreditation
of Healthcare Organizations. And, although military healthcare has long been “managed care,” it
isn’t unique—civilian managed care organizations
are increasingly providing America’s healthcare.
Mixed Agency in Military Healthcare
The military healthcare professional wears two
hats as a member of two cultures—civilian healthcare and the military. In both professional arenas,
the cultures are highly structured, routinely demand more than minimal personal sacrifice of their
members, and require their members to maintain
high standards of personal and professional conduct.
Ironically, one culture (medical) aims to preserve life,
while the other (military) stands ready to take lives
(arguably, to protect and preserve other lives).
Military healthcare differs from its civilian counterpart because of unique differences in the military’s
culture. For example, military rank structure creates unique power issues among military professionals and patients. Unlike civilian patients who
can pursue legal causes of action against their care
givers, military service members are prohibited by
federal law from suing the government in response
to failed care. Indeed, sometimes a military service
member’s medical decision-making ability is severely restricted, such that failure to consent to a
medical procedure may mean immediate employment termination.
Military healthcare providers have both a peacetime and a wartime mission. Peacetime missions
include providing healthcare to service members
and their authorized dependents as well as operations other than war, such as humanitarian missions
(eg, Hurricane Andrew, Somalia) or a multinational
peacekeeping mission (eg, Bosnia). Wartime missions include providing healthcare for US and allied service members, enemy prisoners of war
(EPWs), and often civilian populations indigenous
to the war’s location (Figure 21-5). The provision
of wartime healthcare is governed by the Geneva
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
703
Conventions. Given the requirements of international law and the military’s readiness and warfighting goals, military healthcare’s obligations and
responses to patients can vary greatly, differing
perhaps from civilian triage. Thus, for example,
prioritization based on the Geneva Conventions or
the principles of battlefield triage, which emphasize military mission, suggests potential differences
from civilian mass casualty triage principles.
Values like courage or integrity that are deeply
imbedded within military culture suggest potential
differences from civilian healthcare when those
military values encounter healthcare values like
relieving suffering or therapeutic privilege. Although these norms and character attributes are
observable in civilian healthcare, it is doubtful that
they are, on the whole, as pervasive there as in the
military context.
Major Subcultures in Healthcare
Although the medical healthcare team functions
as a team, there are several subcultures within
healthcare. Understanding these subcultures helps
to facilitate effective communication and lessen
misunderstandings and tensions between the various healthcare professionals.
Medicine and Nursing. Medicine and nursing
(Figure 21-6) are healthcare’s most easily perceived
subcultures. Major differences have existed between
the two throughout the centuries and continue to
this day. These differences suggest significant potential for conflicts of values. The classic and parochial explanation, “doctors cure while nurses care,”
only begins to explain the potential conflicts. One
need only briefly examine the language each profession uses to discuss ethical problems to observe
the significant potential for conflict between doctors and nurses. For example, in a study of Westernmedicine–trained healthcare professionals, Scandinavian doctors and nurses were asked to give their
responses to ethically difficult clinical cases. Doctors’ response themes included: disease, scientific
knowledge, distance, paternalism, preserving life,
opportunism, power, survival, and feeling isolated
as an individual. Nurse response themes included:
health and daily life, experiential knowledge, closeness to the patient, quality of life, pessimism, powerlessness, death with dignity, and being together
with colleagues. 54 The study demonstrates radically
different professional value perspectives between
medicine and nursing. In addition, medicine and
nursing lack internally homogeneous values within
themselves individually. Doctors are far from agreed
about medicine’s ends. The current physician-assisted suicide controversy involves major debate
about medicine’s ultimate ends (eg, patient autonomy and relieving suffering vs. human health
and wholeness) and dispels the notion that medicine is a homogeneous culture. The same is true for
the nursing profession, which is currently debating the meaning of “caring”—nursing’s very
heart—in the context of increased patient rights,
enhanced technology, fewer players in “the doctor–
nurse game,”55,56 feminist concerns, and similar issues.
The Culture of Physicians. In his article, “Cultural Influences on Physician Communication in
Healthcare Teams,” Cali points out that physicians
learn certain cultural values during their medical
training. 57(pp23–25) They learn to value scientific objectivity while discounting the importance of emotional well-being or expression. Medical students
are expected to “act like a doctor,” and use of medical jargon leaves no room for student objectivity.
The acquisition of knowledge is above all other priorities. Emotional responses are to be handled in
private. Beginning with the drive to gain admission
to medical school, a professional omnipotence is
developed. If successfully admitted, the new student learns that he or she is “set apart” from those
unable to enter medicine’s inner sanctum. Physician instructors encourage and reinforce the drive
to excel in medical school and to impress others
with knowledge and mastery of facts. Medical students are taught to acknowledge that mistakes will
Fig. 21-5. The 5th Mobile Army Surgical Hospital
(MASH), a US Army field hospital, at Ad-Damman, Saudi
Arabia, during the Persian Gulf War (1990–1991). Artwork by SFC Sieger Hartgers. Courtesy of the US Army
Center of Military Art.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
704
be made, but not to dwell on them and to develop a
protective sense of omnipotence and omniscience
(Figure 21-7). The use of medical jargon, class differences, and the withholding of information further enhance physician power. Part of this withholding of information occurs when physicians limit
their availability to others. This causes other
healthcare staff to spend a considerable amount of
time tracking the physician’s day-to-day patient
management. In these situations, time with the physician readily becomes a prized commodity.
As with most skilled professionals, physicians
develop heroes in their own profession. The recognition of admirable traits in other physicians occurs
gradually. Often a physician is admired for a particular expertise (eg, possessing technical proficiency, achieving success with particular types of
cases, or demonstrating genuine compassion). The
medical student often builds a personal repertoire
of skills and values by selecting fragments of heroism recognized in these established physicians.
Medicine also has its own rites of passage. For example, young physicians are taught to subordinate
personal comforts and to endure a large degree of
hardship. “House Officer Stress Syndrome,” which
involves episodic cognitive impairment, chronic
anger, pervasive cynicism, family discord, depression, suicidal ideation and suicide, and substance
abuse, is quite prevalent. 58
Even physician communication patterns are culturally learned. Minimizing or trivializing experiences helps the physician maintain an emotional
distance and protects the sense of omnipotence. An
example of this is found in a feature of life among
Fig. 21-6. Robert Thorn’s recent painting depicts a religious nurse in a medieval hospital. These nurses were the
forerunner of today’s highly trained nursing professionals. The nurses were involved in the lives of their patients 24
hours a day, beginning the model of care persisting until modern times. Courtesy of Parke-Davis, Division of WarnerLambert Company.
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
705
surgeons called “the horror story.” These moral
parables, so-to-speak, are “an element of the oral
culture of medicine that remind all that healing is a
difficult business that must always be done with
care.”59(p103) These stories are at times somewhat
humorous with actions set in the past at an exact
time that no one can recall and the participants in
the story are ones whose names cannot be recalled.
They usually come in two forms: the cautionary tale
(drives home the need for caution, care, and completeness) and the story that communicates the
shared difficulties that all surgeons face. 59(pp103–104)
Naming and humor shields physicians from the
awesome encroachments of suffering, death, and
powerlessness. It doesn’t take long for the physician to learn how to control situations through communication behavior.
The Subculture of Managed Care. Four metaphors embody the meaning of American healthcare:
(1) the ministry of healing, (2) the war against disease, (3) the defense of patients’ rights, and (4) the
newest metaphor—“healthcare as an industry.”60
Together they describe a culture rich in tradition,
ripe with change, and filled with potential for increased conflict among the basic values undergirding each metaphor. The potential for the greatest
conflict stems from the “healthcare as an industry”
metaphor, particularly the burgeoning industry of
managed care.
Under managed care, the doctor balances patients’ interests against one another in allocating
limited resources among them with one clear objective—to cut costs. Bonuses and fee withholds
encourage and enforce the physician’s cost-consciousness. Thus, patients’ needs compete directly
with the doctor’s financial interests,61(p331) with the
result that managed care creates major potential
conflicts within healthcare with two of healthcare’s
four metaphors—the physician as benevolent healer
and the patient’s rights.
Managed care may also be viewed as part of a
larger healthcare subculture—health services delivery, or healthcare administration—a subculture
with values that routinely conflict with healthcare’s
Fig. 21-7. This 19th century drawing of a physician holding death at bay reflects a cultural view of the role of physicians. Medical students tend to be indoctrinated into a culture of war, in which they battle death rather than focusing
primarily on the needs of the patient. Reproduced with permission from Corbis, Inc.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
706
traditional clinical subcultures. Consider its values
interaction with traditional physician values. Managerial values like total quality management, group
activity, process focus, and cooperation are at odds
with traditional physician values like professional autonomy, self-reliance, and independence. Regarding
patients’ religious or cultural values, the culture of
managed care with its cost-cutting focus may be less
open and responsive to tailoring healthcare to an
individual patient’s religious or cultural values,
particularly when honoring the patient’s values
costs more.
Fig. 21-8. “My students know nothing about being Jews,”
says Vladimir Zeiv, a teacher of Hebrew at the Moscow
Synagogue. Judaism as a culture encompasses not only
the religious aspects of life, but also every aspect of living. This rich tradition is passed down from generation
to generation. Reproduced with permission from National
Geographic. Feb 1991; 23.
WELLNESS AND ILLNESS: TWO OTHER RELIGIOUS-CULTURAL VIEWS
Many cultures have developed at least an oral
tradition that predates American culture. The values of these cultures share the same basic concern
for the health and medical welfare of the patient
and society as Americans do; however, the sources
from which their values have evolved present a
contrast to those found in this country. Two of these,
Judaism and Islam, are religious-based cultures that
provide an interesting contrast to American views of
health and illness, and inform their medical ethics.
Judaism
For the purposes of the discussion in this chapter, two aspects of Judaism will be presented: (1)
the view of life and illness, and (2) the principles of
Jewish medical ethics.
Judaism’s View of Life and Illness
Basic beliefs that form the basis of Jewish thinking concern life and the body, illness and healing.
As with all religions, these beliefs are handed down
from one generation to the next (Figure 21-8). “In
the struggle for survival and the fight for life itself,
Judaism assigns to individual human life an intrinsic value, probably higher than any of its cognate
faiths.”62(p75) This belief is based on the passage in
the Talmud (one of the primary sources of rabbinic
discussions and decisions on medical matters in the
ancient world) that describes the creation of Adam
by God, in that “if any person causes a single life to
perish, Scripture regards him as if he had caused
an entire world to perish” (Sanhedrin 37a). Believing God created bodies as well as minds, emotions,
and wills, the rabbis assumed that human bodies
were God’s property, which he leased for the duration of one’s life. Thus, one does not have the right
to destroy the body by suicide, but rather has the
responsibility to take care of it. 63(p45),64(p8) In Jewish
halakah (the Judaic legal system), virtually every
religious precept, with the exception of murder,
idolatry, and forbidden sexual relationships, is suspended in order to enhance even the remote possibility of saving a human life. Moreover, matters of
hygiene, diet, exercise, and sleep were subjects for
legal obligations under Judaism. 64(p10),65(pp17–19),66(p8)
As the creator of everything, according to the
Bible, God is ultimately the author of health and
disease (Deut. 32:39). God is depicted in biblical
accounts as visiting illness on people as a punishment for their sins and as a means of expiation
(Deut. 28). This linkage between sickness and sin
has been challenged even though it has been sustained in Jewish sources. The Book of Job (Figure
21-9) addresses this issue as does a popular book,
When Bad Things Happen to Good People, by Rabbi
Harold Kushner. Because it was difficult to explain
the suffering of the Jews according to this view of
sin and sickness, Judaism instead generally addressed
the degradation, death, destruction, and exile that
Jews suffered rather than physical illness. “Wounds
and dismemberment suffered in the course of persecutions were all seen as a part of the broader question of how God would allow human beings to inflict suffering of all sorts on his covenanted people
in the apparent absence of sin.”64(p13)
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
707
The causative properties of sin did not prevent
the rabbis of the Talmud from identifying the physical causes of illness or from seeking to cure them.
The most widely held view was that blood was the
chief cause of disease. Therefore, bloodletting was
prescribed for various illnesses. Other carriers of
disease mentioned in the Talmud include bile, the
air, contaminated food or beverages, bodily discharges, clothing, bath water, animals, and insects.
Lack of fluids, injury to the spinal cord, excessive
eating, fasting, drinking of liquor, and sexual activity were also thought to cause disease. Psychological causes were also recognized. It is also notable that Jewish sources attributed sickness to the
work of demons, although they rarely linked the
demons to the previous sins of their victims. “Jews
apparently acquiesced to the inconsistency of believing in both an omnipotent God and independent demons.”64(p14)
Jewish belief in the obligation to save the life of
an endangered person is derived from the Talmudic verse, “Neither shall thou stand idly by the blood
of thy neighbor” (Lev. 19:16). The Talmud and the
various codes of Jewish law offer specific examples
of situations in which moral obligation exists with regard to rendering aid—rescue of a person drowning
in a river, assistance to one being mauled by a beast,
and aid to a person being attacked by bandits. 63(p46)
These examples mandated nontherapeutic interventions. What remained controversial in early Judaism was accepting the work of therapeutic practitioners to cure illness.
To counter the point that God is the source of all
healing, and not man, the rabbis pointed out that
God himself had authorized healing, in fact required it. This authorization and imperative was
found in two biblical verses: (1) an assailant must
ensure that his victim is thoroughly healed (Exodus 21:19–20), and (2) “you shall restore the lost
property to him” (Deut. 22:2). The Talmud understood the Exodus verse as not only giving permission for the physician to cure, but making such treatment mandatory. 63(pp47–48) “On the basis of the extra
letter in the Hebrew text of the Deuteronomy passage, the Talmud declared that the verse included
the obligation to restore a fellow man’s body as well
as his property; hence there was an obligation to
come to the aid of another person in a life threatening situation.”64(p15),67(p16)
Other Talmudic instructions include the obligation of providing medical aid to encompass expenditure of financial resources (Lev. 19:16, previously
mentioned), and the exemption of physicians from
any liability for injuries they caused in the process
of healing (“And you shall love your neighbor as
yourself,” Lev. 19:18). It is assumed by the rabbis
that this last reference infers that the patient, like
the physician himself, would be willing to take
some risk to be healed (Sanhedrin 48b). One other
Jewish law forbade any person to live in a town in
which there was no physician, for doing so would
expose a person to an unacceptable degree of risk
and would prevent them from fulfilling his or her
obligation to receive medical care (Yoma 83-84,
Sanhedrin 17b). 67(pp37–38)
Principles of Jewish Medical Ethics
Many of the aforementioned Jewish moral and
halakic principles and rules have significant bearing upon the Jewish practice of medicine. These
comprise what could be considered fundamental
principles of Jewish medical ethics: 68(p406),69(p66)
• Judaism subscribes to commitments, obligations, duties, and commandments commonly
Fig. 21-9. The Purpose of Man’s Being. “Job,” by Dutch
painter Jan Lievens (1607–1674). The sufferings of Job, a
man blameless before God, challenge the linkage between
sickness and sin. Reproduced with permission from the
National Gallery of Canada.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
708
shared by all observant Jews. Jewish ethics
subscribes to moral self-fulfillment through
the obedience to moral-religious norms and
requirements.
• Judaism, in general, favors a casuistry approach, rather than a zealous adherence to general principles. Each case is dealt with on its
own merits, depending heavily on the specific and individual circumstances.
• Judaism is against absolutizing any single precept, rather, a middle way is always advocated.
When conflicting values in medicine are
encountered, each patient must be considered individually, and a solution is reached
depending on the specific clinical and ethical circumstances.
• The principal aim of studying ethics and Jewish law is to act accordingly. The dictum is
“to learn in order to perform,” and not to
merely engage in intellectual exercise or
academic analysis.
• The physician–patient relationship is viewed as
a covenant. This relationship is not viewed
as a negotiable contract in which the parties
agree to the relationship beforehand and
which either party can terminate without
consequences. There is an obligation upon
a physician to always extend help to those
who are in need of his or her services.
• Judaism views the seeking of medical attention
by the patient as a moral imperative. No one
has the right to refuse medical treatment
deemed necessary and effective by competent opinion.
• Human life is sacrosanct and of supreme worth.
Any precept, whether religious or ethical
(except idolatry, murder, and adultery), is
automatically suspended if it conflicts with
the interests of human life. Every human
life is equally valuable and inviolable.
Thus, the Jewish view of life, illness, health, healing, and medical ethics is primarily based on
halakah, and embraces Jewish laws, practices, and
observances since the time of Abraham. Jews speak
from within their own religious tradition that recognizes the sanctity and worth of human life, and
the imperatives for the patient and the healthcare
professional to seek and provide needed medical
care. Yet, Judaism recognizes the limitations of
medical science to heal or cure in every instance.
Accordingly, one is neither to prolong the moment
of death, nor hasten its arrival. Jews are keenly
aware that the body, as the creation and property
of God, is on loan for the duration of life.
Islam
Islam is the third of the monotheistic religions,
commonly referred to as the Abrahamic religions,
the other two being Judaism and Christianity. The
three principal figures in these religions share the
ancestry of Abraham: Moses and Jesus through his
son Isaac, and Mohammed through his son Ismail.
They all embrace the Abrahamic belief in God and
His oneness. Uniquely, Islam recognizes the other
two religions and proclaims itself as the last link of
the long chain of God-sent messages. 70(p57)
Muslim writers emphasize the uniqueness of
God’s revelation to Mohammed, in which religion
and morality are seen as inextricably linked. Thus,
Islam is not only a religion of dogma and theological statements, but it also influences deeply the behavior of every believer in all areas of his or her
life. 71(p174) Islam has a framework of a total legal system to regulate and organize various aspects of
human activities. “Law is a human necessity, and
morals alone are not enough for actual government
of society nor can they abound in a legal vacuum.”
This total system of Islam is called the Shari’a, and
although comprehensive, only a few rulings in it
are fixed. It represents outlines that allow for flexibility and for new rulings to be evolved to suit new
circumstances in changing times and places, but
always within the general framework established
by the Shari’a. 70(p59)
Islamic View of Wellness and Illness
The Shari’a is filled with rulings that reflect Islamic concepts of wellness and illness. Health and
wellness are described not simply as the absence of
disturbing factors such as illness, but as embracing
the wholeness of human well-being. Wholeness,
according to Islam, is granted by God, who is the
cause of all wholeness, for “God gives food and
drink, heals the sick, and makes persons die and
live again” (26:79–81 [references in the Quran are
noted in parentheses and follow this format]). Because God is the creator of everything, all evil is
related to him insofar as it is caused to remind humans of misdoings in order to better the wrongdoer’s
attitude. The Muslim knows that God’s will is somehow involved, either by directly causing suffering
or allowing it to happen. “Suffering and illness
clearly show that the originally intended wholeness
has been disturbed either because God is punishing the wrongdoer or because humans must directly
suffer the consequences of human sins.”71(p177)
Moral education is seen as an important preventative measure to preserve a sane community and
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
709
to guarantee the individual’s happiness within that
community. “Medicine, hygiene, and regulations for
healthy living together form the guidelines for good
living according to God’s will.”71(p178) To underscore
this widely held Islamic belief, a book was written
under the general theme of “medicine in the Koran.”72 In it, the author clearly shows that medicine
and health, in Islam, must be seen as integral parts
of wellness in general.
In doing God’s will and putting the divine principles into practice, historically, Muslims did not
merely wait for God to act but encouraged their
scholars to accumulate as much knowledge as possible. With regard to medicine, they integrated
Greek and other foreign medical techniques in order to cure the sick, at least as far as God allows for
success in curing, as no one dies unless it is God’s
decision (3:45). According to the Quran (5:32), saving and preserving life are among the highly regarded tasks. In practice, Muslims were among the
first to build hospitals, engage in surgery, and use
herbal and medicinal therapies for both corporal
(Figure 21-10) and mental illnesses. 71(p179),73(p158)
Principles of Islamic Medical Ethics
As a means of incorporating Muslim beliefs and
concepts in illness, healing, and specific religious
obligations toward caring for the sick, the International Conference on Islamic Medicine, held in Kuwait in 1981, formulated a code of professional
medical ethics. The code includes guidelines for the
Islamic physician’s behavior and attitude, both at
the personal and professional levels71,74,75:
• The Muslim physician must believe in God and
in the Islamic teachings and practice, both in
private and public life. He must follow the
path of righteousness and always seek
God’s support.
• The physician has a professional requirement
to acquire and maintain proper medical knowledge. Scientific or academic research is encouraged so long as it aims to solve a particular problem or to “reveal the signs of
God in His creation” (20:114; 35:28; 39:9).
• The physician must abide by the legal rules
regulating the profession, provided they do not
violate Islamic teachings. Obedience to the
law, both temporal and spiritual, is proper
and expected (4:59).
• The care the physician provides to his patient
must be in accordance with God’s guidelines.
Life is given by God, and cannot be taken
away except by Him or with His permission (5:32; 25:3; 67:2).
• The physician has no right to terminate any
human life under his care. Abortion is restricted unless the life of the mother is at
risk. For all patients, when treatment carries no prospect of cure, it ceases to be mandatory, but no action should be taken to
actively bring about a patient’s death.
• The physician has no right to recommend or
administer any harmful material to his patients.
God makes good things lawful and bad
things forbidden (7:157). Pain and suffering must be alleviated physically (by medication), as well as psychologically. Active
euthanasia is forbidden.
• The physician must render the needed help regardless of the financial ability or ethnic origin
of the patient. The advice given and the treatment rendered must consider both the
patient’s body and mind, always remembering to enjoin what is just and forbid what
is wrong (76:8–9).
• The physician must protect patient confidentiality (23:8).
• The physician must adopt an appropriate manner of speech. It must be pure and uplifting
(22:24).
• It is advisable that the physician examine patients of the opposite sex in the presence of a
third person whenever feasible. This serves to
protect both the patient and the physician
(4:28; 24:30–31). Situations of this sort are
Fig. 21-10. A pregnant woman, in the traditional Islamic
clothing, receives a prenatal check-up. Islamic medicine
has a rich and ancient heritage. It developed many innovative treatments while maintaining traditional modesty
and values. Reproduced with permission from Martha
Tabor.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
710
always a test of the physician’s moral character and his strength.
• The physician must not criticize another physician in the presence of patients or health personnel (4:148; 49:11).
• The physician must refuse payment for the
treatment of another physician or his immediate family. There is no specific instruction
for this in the Quran or in Islamic tradition.
However, an analogy is drawn when God
says: “Alms are for the poor, the needy and
those employed to administer the funds…”
(9:60). This is a situation where the persons
providing a certain service are entitled to
use the same service at the time of need.
This also applies to physicians.
• The physician must always strive to use wisdom in all his decisions and the reward will be
great. “To whom wisdom is granted, is
granted a great deal of good” (2:269).
Islam, as a religion, has played a fundamental
role in the creation of a culture that has nurtured
the cultivation and development of medicine. Medical issues in Islam are not discussed in isolation
apart from theology and religious law. Even though
Islamic tradition held a high standard of ethical
conduct in medicine, it was not until 1981 that any
real attempt was made to codify the teachings of
the Quran into a code of ethics. Although this code
is not endorsed by all Muslim physicians, it does
clarify how different the moral reasoning is of one
in the Muslim tradition from secular and JudeoChristian medical ethical discussions.
American medicine and its ethics reflect the empirical science it guides: it values the pursuit of
objectivity and quantification of experience, and is
analytical, rationalistic, dialectical, and often secular in spirit. 18(p191) Though its roots run deep in the
Calvinistic tradition, American medical ethics has
evolved into a rights-based discipline that seemingly accords an inordinate amount of autonomy
to the individual without regard to the consequences of that autonomy to the good of the community or society.
Within the Jewish and Islamic traditions, a person is seen as the creation and handiwork of God,
as a member of the larger community of faith. What
one does, as an individual, cannot be easily separated from the religious and social milieu in which
one lives. One is less prone, as a Jew or Muslim, to
make decisions without considering their impact on
his or her standing in the church, the family, and
the community.
ADDRESSING CONFLICTS ARISING FROM RELIGIOUS AND CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS
As noted in the opening pages of this chapter,
the American military is increasingly multicultural
and multiethnic, just as is American society. Considering the various deployments of American military resources, it is only natural that American
healthcare professionals will encounter individuals and cultures that can be considerably different
from those in which they grew up. From the perspective of military mission, it is essential that religious and cultural consideration be given to each
patient, in each circumstance, to maximize the
medical benefits of an intervention. The first step
is to understand the potential for conflict.
The Potential for Conflict
The greater the diversity of ideas and cultures,
the greater the potential for conflict when people
interact, especially at times of increased stress. The
following examples reveal conflicts between healthcare professionals and patients and family members’ religious or cultural values.
A Jehovah’s Witness father states his religiously
based demand: “No blood transfusions!” Engaged
in a desperate attempt to save the father’s young
son’s life, the physician responds, “I may be sued,
but I’ll not be responsible for murdering this boy
because of your beliefs!” Asked the number of pregnancies she has had, a Hispanic woman answers,
“two.” Later she mentions a third pregnancy—a
miscarriage. In her Central American cultural background, miscarriages don’t equate with pregnancies; only the successful pregnancies count. 76(p256)
The first example of religious value that creates
a potentially high-drama conflict in patient care is
easily identifiable. The second example involves a
much more subtle conflict between different cultures’ languages, and highlights the fact that “language differences between physicians and patients
are indicative of cultural differences that significantly affect care.”77(p727) Likely, many American
healthcare professionals routinely and incorrectly
label such conflicts as resulting wholly from the
patient’s or family members’ odd or aberrant religious or cultural values, with little or no recognition of the role of the healthcare professionals’
corporate (let alone personal, religious, or cultural)
values in the conflict. Viewing the conflict as healthReligious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
711
care versus the patient’s (or loved ones’) religious
and cultural values is overly simplistic. It fails to
acknowledge that the patient’s religious and cultural values may indeed be another concept of
healthcare. It also fails to understand that American healthcare is permeated with its own cultural
values.
Some Caregiver Guidelines
The following discussion highlights five guidelines that healthcare professionals should employ
in addressing conflicts in patient healthcare decision making that result from religious or cultural
considerations or both.
Develop an Awareness of the Potential for
Conflict
Leininger describes her observations of an
American nurse with a Philippine female patient
in her first stay in an American hospital. Having
placed a small towel over the patient’s breasts, the
nurse attempted to wash the rest of the patient’s
almost naked body. During the washing, the patient
was tense and struggled to cover her nakedness
with blankets. She told the nurse, “I am clean and
do not need this bath. Please leave me alone.” The
annoyed nurse stopped the bath and left the room.
Later, family members helped the patient to wash
herself. 78 Privacy and modesty are very important
to Philippine female patients. In the preceding example, the patient communicates these values to the
nurse as best she can. Clearly, the nurse’s lack of
awareness about this cultural factor contributes directly to the conflict over the care being provided.
Approaches to developing an awareness of the
potential for religious- or culture-based conflict in
individual patient care decisions may differ. A minimalist approach is that until the patient communicates the potential for a problem, the caregiver need
have little concern for potential conflict. This approach would likely have strong support in the costconscious, time-constrained managed care setting,
where cost-cutting efficiencies compete with patient
autonomy for highest priority. An advocate for honest and complete informed consent communication
between doctors and their patients,79 however,
would likely say that caregivers have an ethical
duty to actively pursue and develop an awareness
of the potential for conflict.
The practical and/or ethical duty owed the patient may lie somewhere between the two positions.
Given a general awareness of the potential for such
conflicts, the caregiver should “screen” (triage) patients: (a) seeking to understand the patient in the
larger context of his or her religion or culture and
(b) sorting out for additional inquiry those patients
with higher risks of care decision conflict grounded
in religious or cultural values.
More than listening to patients’ or family members’ words is involved. Patients and their families
express their religious and cultural beliefs in a variety of behaviors and actions. Helpful clues about
their religious or cultural values may be found in
areas such as: (a) communication (eg, eye contact,
idioms, first names, demeanor, expressions of pain);
(b) social custom (eg, clothing, symbols, dietary
practices, colors, ways of expressing grief); (c) family relationship (eg, visiting patterns, self-care issues, gifts, kinship); (d) gender issues (eg, women
and authority, male dominance, female circumcision, virginity, female purity and modesty); and (e)
folk medicine (eg, coin rubbing, cupping, folk healers, scars, fat).
In developing the awareness under discussion,
the caregiver must actively listen to the patient,
approaching him with a “help me understand why”
mind-set. Where a conflict involves language differences, improved translation alone may be inadequate to resolve the conflict. Any interpretation of
the translation needs to be understood in the context
of the patient’s religious or cultural value system.
See Patients as Individuals Rather Than Stereotypes
Providing healthcare to an individual patient
within the framework of a religious or cultural stereotype suggests potential infringements upon the
patient’s religious or cultural autonomy. For example, although Jehovah’s Witness patients generally refuse blood transfusions, stereotyping all
Jehovah’s Witness patients as individuals who will
refuse blood products without asking how the
broad prohibition applies to an individual Jehovah’s
Witness patient could violate the patient’s autonomy. People accept or comply with “official”
religious or cultural beliefs or practices in varying
degrees. Thus, for example, some Jehovah’s Witness
patients while refusing whole blood will accept
products made from blood fractions.
A fine line exists, however, between framing
one’s understanding of the patient by using stereotypes as compared to appropriately using generalizations. For example, a stereotype such as, “Mrs.
Gonzalez is a Mexican; she must be Catholic; she
must have a large family,” may well preclude further and open discussion. It fails to focus on Mrs.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
712
Gonzalez specifically. Using a generalization like,
“I think many Mexican Catholics have large families; I wonder if Mrs. Gonzalez has a large family,”
opens the discussion to an appropriate, personalized focus on Mrs. Gonzalez’s cultural situation.
Understand the Impact of Religion and Culture
on Patient Autonomy
Religious and cultural considerations can actually change the concept of “patient autonomy” that
is so important in modern American healthcare
practice and ethics. American healthcare deems the
competent, informed adult patient “autonomous.”
Generally speaking, any patient can choose or reject medically indicated treatment or therapy even
when it involves serious health risks, except where
there is appreciable risk of serious harm to a third
party. Consequently, obtaining the patient’s informed consent is essential in American healthcare
jurisprudence and ethics. However, as in the case
of Leah, sometimes autonomy or its derivative—
informed consent—runs afoul of the patient’s religious or cultural values. A patient’s cultural or religiously grounded view of “authority” may have
serious implications for the patient’s understanding of his autonomy, determining whether the patient views his role in the healthcare setting as either an active or a passive participant in treatment
decisions.
Develop an Awareness of One’s Own Religious or
Cultural Values
The healthcare professional must be aware of his
or her personal or professional religious or cultural
values as they relate to the patient and the patient’s
autonomy. Cultivating this awareness is very important. Where those values differ significantly
from the patient’s, the caregiver may have an ethical duty, and possibly a legal duty, to disclose his
beliefs to the patient. In some cases, the caregiver’s
appropriate action may be to transfer the case to
another caregiver and to withdraw from the case.
A classic conflict situation involves the physician
who, because of religious beliefs, refuses to grant a
terminal patient’s request to withdraw life support.
A recent survey of 301 Texas physicians suggests that
doctors’ religious beliefs can ultimately influence their
clinical decisions. The survey produced a profile of
the physician who is likely to deny medical futility
while treating patients who are clearly dying or persistently unconscious. The profile details the following characteristics: male, attends religious services,
defines failure as “not doing all you can do,” low fear
of legal consequences, uncertain about efficacy and
benefit of treatment for terminally ill patients, and
emotional detachment from patients. 80
It seems obvious that a doctor should not force
his patients to accept his (the doctor’s) personal
religious views. In December 1989, the American
Psychiatric Association approved the following
guideline to that effect for its member psychiatrists:
Psychiatrists should not impose their own religious, antireligious, or ideologic systems of beliefs
on their patients, nor should they substitute such
beliefs or ritual for accepted diagnostic concepts
or therapeutic practice. 81(p543)
However, simply adopting rules like the above
may insufficiently protect patients from their psychiatrists’ religious or cultural values. This is because Western psychotherapy, according to Torrey,
is steeped in Western values. “[It] … is culture
bound.”82(p219) Post, in his review of Torrey’s position, goes on to note that psychotherapy has
“middle class values such as self-reliance, individualism, enhancement of wealth and social status, and
rationalism.”83(p219) He acknowledges the significant
conflict these values have with “the many forms of
religious devotion, self-denial, and spiritual discipline that reject these values.”83(p219) (Post,83 for instance, discusses the problem of psychiatric involvement in faith breaking [“deprogramming”] and
notes that some psychiatrists view religious conversion as pathological. This is a clear example of how
Western psychotherapy’s culture rejects religious
fundamentalism.) Consequently, regardless of the
individual caregiver’s personal religious or cultural
values, the professional cultural (and arguably religious) values he embodies may conflict with the
patient’s religious or cultural values.
What about the a-religious caregiver? One can
envision the physician who wholly embraces the
philosophy of science and/or secular humanism as
his value system. Such a caregiver might project
hopelessness, fatalistic surrender, or faith in nothing beyond medical science upon the patient. Considering the general rule in medicine that a physician should not abandon the patient, such behavior might inflict serious pain and psychological
harm on the patient, resulting in emotional and
psychological abandonment of the patient.
To illustrate the point further, evidence exists that
more African-Americans and Hispanics, as compared
to non-Hispanic whites, want their doctors to keep
them alive regardless of how ill they are, while more
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
713
non-Hispanic whites agree to stop life-prolonging
treatment under some circumstances compared to
African-Americans and Hispanics. 84(pp157–158) Whether
or not these differences are due to cultural dynamics alone or to both cultural and religious considerations, one can envision possible conflicts when a
physician who zealously pursues science’s ends
aggressively seeks to persuade an African-American or Hispanic patient or family to acknowledge
medical futility and stop life-prolonging treatment.
Be an “Honest Broker” of Others’ Values
When a patient’s or others’ religious or cultural
values conflict with a caregiver’s personal or professional values, the caregiver must appropriately
“broker” the patient’s values, using honesty and
integrity in addressing the conflict. The “honest
broker” caregiver consciously seeks to avoid using
religious or cultural stereotypes that preclude additional and open discussion about the patient’s
specific beliefs and values (Figure 21-11). He encourages healthy, positive dialogue with patients
and others designed to clarify and understand their
views. He facilitates rational discussion of all relevant
values that allows for even-handed persuasion and
precludes manipulative or coercive dialogue or behavior. He encourages focusing the discussion on
how patients’ decision-making processes are influenced by their culture and faith traditions (Figure
21-12) and away from a singular focus on clinical
“certainties.”
Caregivers, patients, families, and others (eg,
hospitals, other patients) have vested interests in the
Fig. 21-12. Blinking back tears, Elga Pahkel listens to the
Estonian National Anthem. Photograph courtesy of Larry
Davis, reproduced with permission. Photograph originally
appeared in National Geographic. November 1990; 3.
Fig. 21-11. Wedding belle Hayat Tawil was born and
raised in the United States but met and married her husband, Eyad, during a visit to the West Bank. Photograph
courtesy of JoAnna Pinneo; reproduced with permission.
Photograph originally appeared in National Geographic.
June 1992; 110.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
714
outcomes of the conflicts. At times it may be very
difficult or impossible for the healthcare professional
with a stake in the outcome to address the patient’s
or other parties’ values with honesty and integrity.
Caregivers who become entrenched or take sides
in the dispute, who “demonize” the patient and the
patient’s values as “extreme” or “irrational,” or who
are unwilling or unable to remain open to the patient and his values, cannot serve as honest brokers.
They need help to accomplish this guideline. In
addition, some value conflicts are so serious that
even if the caregiver is fully aware of all parties’
values and is truly seeking to function as an honest
broker of those values, additional help is needed.
Some of the sources available to help the
caregiver address the conflict include: (a) other
healthcare professionals, (b) institutional ethics
committees, (c) trained healthcare ethics consultants, (d) ethical decision-making models, (e) consultation with religious or cultural authorities, (f)
conflict resolution strategies, training, and expertise, (g) participation in healthcare ethics or religious/cultural awareness programs, and (h)
caregiver self-education.
CONCLUSION
Healthcare and its ethics have a long tradition
that has largely taken on the values, beliefs, and
practices of Western religious and cultural heritage
found in America. Yet, Americans are increasingly
interacting with persons—both patients and
healthcare professionals, in this country and
abroad—who are from different cultural backgrounds and who profess different religious beliefs.
As the proliferation of medical science and technology increases, and as more patients from different
backgrounds come to the United States for help,
healthcare professionals must avoid an ethnocentric view of what is best for their patients. They
should instead make a good faith effort to identify,
understand, and be sensitive to all patients’ religious and cultural needs as it affects their healthcare
decisions. In addition, healthcare professionals
should be aware of their own religious, cultural, and
professional heritage and how they influence personal and professional perceptions, beliefs, and actions in their relationships with others.
As the world grows smaller and Americans become more aware of the differences that exist among
various groups of people, including the multiplicity of subcultures within the United States, it is
important for all people to understand and appreciate that wanting to have health, to be free from
pain and suffering, and to live and die with dignity
are universal wants that transcend religious, cultural, and national boundaries. As military healthcare professionals provide the means to help each
other meet these goals, the diversity and richness
of each other’s personhood and heritage should be
celebrated.
REFERENCES
1.
Lantos JD, Offner SK, Chambers TS. What should Leah be told? [Case study and commentaries]. Second Opin.
1993;18:81–97.
2.
Kluckhohn F. Dominant and variant value orientations. In: Brink P, ed. Transcultural Nursing: A Book of Readings. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1979: 63–81.
3.
Jonsen AR. American moralism and the origin of bioethics in the United States. J Med Philos. 1991;16:113–130.
4.
Jonsen AR. American moralism and the origin of bioethics in the United States. In: Pellegrino E, Mazzarella P,
Corsi P, eds. Transcultural Dimensions in Medical Ethics. Frederick, Md: University Publishing Group; 1992: 21–33.
5.
Miller P. The Life of the Mind in America. New York: Harcourt, Brace; 1980.
6.
Marsden GM. Fundamentalism in American Culture. New York: Oxford University Press; 1980.
7.
Ramsey P. The Patient As Person. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press; 1970.
8.
National Heart and Lung Institute. Report of the Totally Artificial Heart Assessment Panel. Washington, DC: Department of Health, Education and Welfare; 1973.
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
715
9.
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. The Belmont
Report. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1978.
10.
President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1983.
11.
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1994.
12.
Jonsen AR, Siegler M, Winslade WJ, eds. Clinical Ethics. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1992.
13.
Fletcher JC, Hite CB, Lombardo PA, Marshall MF, eds. Introduction to Clinical Ethics. Charlottesville: University
of Virginia Center for Biomedical Ethics; 1994.
14.
Jonsen A, Toulmin S. The Abuse of Casuistry. Los Angeles: University of California Press; 1988.
15.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. The Virtues in Medical Practice. New York: Oxford University Press; 1993.
16.
Fry ST. Toward a theory of nursing ethics. Adv Nurs Sci. 1989;11(4):8–20.
17.
Jonsen AR. American moralism and the origin of bioethics in the United States. In: Pellegrino E, Mazzarella P,
Corsi P. Transcultural Dimensions in Medical Ethics. Frederick, Md: University Publishing Group; 1992.
18.
Pellegrino ED. Intersections of Western biomedical ethics and world culture: Problematic and possibility. Camb
Q Healthc Ethics. 1992;1(3):191–196.
19.
Wreen M. Autonomy, religious values, and refusal of lifesaving medical treatment. J Med Ethics. 1991;17:124–130.
20.
Princeton Religious Research Center. Religion in America 1992–1993. In: Larson D, Larson S. The Forgotten
Factor in the Physical and Mental Health: What Does the Research Show—An Independent Study Seminar. Rockville,
Md: National Institute for Healthcare Research; 1994: 6–7.
21.
Johnson D, Williams J, Bromley D. Religion, health, and healing: Findings from a southern city. Sociol Analysis.
1986;46(1):66–73.
22.
Trier K, Shupe A. Prayer, religiosity, and healing in the heartland, USA: A research note. Rev Religious Res.
1991;32(4):351–358.
23.
King D, Sobal J, DeForge B. Family practice patients’ experience and beliefs in faith healing. J Fam Pract.
1988;27(5):505–508.
24.
King D, Bushwick B. Beliefs and attitudes of hospital inpatients about faith healing and prayer. J Fam Pract.
1994;39(4):349–352.
25.
Suchman A, Matthews D. What makes the doctor–patient relationship therapeutic: Exploring the connexional
dimensional of patient care. Ann Intern Med. 1988;108:125–130.
26.
Marx K. Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Law: Introduction. Published in the Deutsch Französische
Jahrbücher; 1944.
27.
Freud S. The Future of an Illusion. Garden City, NY: Doubleday; 1927.
28.
Ellis A. Psychotherapy and atheistic values. J Consult Clin Psychology. 1980;48:635–639.
29.
Moore R, Mead L, Pearson T. Youthful precursors of alcohol abuse in physicians. Am J Med. 1990;88:332–336.
30.
Desmond D, Maddux J. Religious programs and careers of chronic heroin users. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse.
1981;8(1):71–83.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
716
31.
Koenig H, George L, Meador K, Blazer D, Ford S. Religious practices and alcoholism in a southern adult population. Hosp Community Psychiatry. 1994;45(3):225–231.
32.
Cook J, Wimberly D. If I should die before I wake: Religious commitment and adjustment to the death of a
child. J Sci Stud Religion. 1983;22(3):222–238.
33.
Conway K. Coping with the stress of medical problems among black and white elderly. Int J Aging Hum Dev.
1985–1986;21:39–48.
34.
Rabins P, Fitting M, Eastham J, Fetting J. The emotional impact of caring for the chronically ill. Psychosom.
1990;31(3):331–336.
35.
Frankel B, Hewitt W. Religion and well-being among Canadian university students: The role of faith groups on
campus. J Sci Stud Religion. 1994;33(1):62–73.
36.
Hannay D. Religion and health. Soc Sci Med. 1980;14A:683–685.
37.
Idler E, Kasl S. Religion, disability, depression, and the timing of death. Am J Sociol. 1992;97(4):1052–1079.
38.
Poloma M, Pendleton B. Religious domains and general well-being. Soc Indicators Res. 1990;22:255–276.
39.
Hadaway CK, Roof WC. Religious commitment and the quality of life in American society. Rev Religious Res.
1978;19:295–307.
40.
McNamara P, St. George A. Measures of religiosity and the quality of life. In: Moberg D, ed. Spiritual WellBeing: Sociological Perspectives. Washington, DC: University Press of America; 1979.
41.
Ellison C. Religious involvement and subjective well-being. J Health Soc Behav. 1991;32:80–99.
42.
Comstock G, Partridge K. Church attendance and health. J Chronic Dis. 1972;25:665–672.
43.
Berkman L, Syme S. Social networks, host resistance, and mortality: A nine-year follow-up study of Alameda
County residents. Am J Epidemiol. 1979;109:186–204.
44.
Berkel J, de Waard F. Mortality pattern and life expectancy of Seventh Day Adventists in the Netherlands. Int J
Epidemiol. 1983;12(4):455–459.
45.
Gardner J, Lyon J. Cancer in Utah Mormon men by church activity level. Am J Epidemiol. 1982;116:243–257.
46.
Faulkner J, DeJong C. Religiosity in 5D: An empirical analysis. In: Andrews M, Boyle J, eds. Transcultural Concepts in Nursing Care. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Company; 1995: 354.
47.
Galanti G. Caring for Patients From Different Cultures. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press; 1991: 35–44.
48.
Herberg P. Theoretical foundations of transcultural nursing. In: Andrews M, Boyle J, eds. Transcultural Concepts
in Nursing Care. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Company; 1995: 3–47.
49.
Brown K. Afro-Caribbean spirituality: A Haitian case study. Second Opin. 1989;11:36–57.
50.
Capra F. The Turning Point. New York: Bantam Books; 1982: 109–110.
51.
Ludman E, Newman J. Yin and yang in the health-related food practices of three Chinese groups. J Nutr Educ.
1984;16:4.
52.
Kleinman A. Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press; 1980.
53.
Dubos R. Medicine evolving. In: Sobel D, ed. Ways of Health. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich; 1979: 21–44.
Religious and Cultural Considerations in Military Healthcare
717
54.
Uden G, Norberg A, Lindseth A, Marhaug V. Ethical reasoning in nurses’ and physicians’ stories about care
episodes. J Adv Nurs. 1992;17(9):1028–1034.
55.
Stein LI. The doctor–nurse game. NLN Publ. 1990;20:159–164.
56.
Stein LI, Watts DT, Howell T. The doctor–nurse game revisited. N Engl J Med. 1990;322(8):546–549.
57.
Cali D. Cultural influences on physician communication in health care teams. JBC. 1991;18(1):22–27.
58.
Coombs RH, May DS, Small GW, eds. Inside Doctoring. New York: Praeger; 1986.
59.
Bosk CL. Forgive and Remember: Managing Medical Failure. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press; 1979.
60.
Winslow G. Minding our language: Metaphors and biomedical ethics. Update. 1994;10:1–6.
61.
Council of Ethical and Judicial Affairs AMA. Ethical issues in managed care. JAMA. 1995;273:330–335.
62.
Glick S. A view from Sinai: A Jewish perspective on biomedical ethics. In: Pellegrino E, Mazzarella P, Corsi P,
eds. Transcultural Dimensions in Medical Ethics. Frederick, Md: University Publishing Group; 1992: 73–82.
63.
Bleich J. The obligation to heal in the Judaic tradition. In: Veatch R, ed. Cross Cultural Perspectives in Medical
Ethics: Readings. Boston: Jones & Bartlett Publishers; 1989: 44–58.
64.
Dorff E. The Jewish tradition. In: Numbers R, Amundsen D, eds. Caring and Curing: Health and Medicine in the
Western Religious Traditions. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company; 1986: 539.
65.
Rosner F, Bleich J. Jewish Bioethics. New York: Sanhedrin Press; 1979.
66.
Rosner F. Modern Medicine and Jewish Ethics. New York: Yeshiva University Press; 1986.
67.
Feldman D. Health and Medicine in the Jewish Tradition: L’Hayyim—To Life. New York: Crossroad Publishing
Company; 1986.
68.
Steinberg A. Bioethics: Secular philosophy, Jewish law and modern medicine. Isr J Med Sci. 1989;25(7):404–409.
69.
Steinberg A. A Jewish perspective on the four principles. In: Gillon R, ed. Principles of Health Care Ethics. New
York: Wiley; 1994: 65–73.
70.
Hathout H. Islamic basis for biomedical ethics. In: Pellegrino E, Mazzarella P, Corsi P, eds. Transcultural Dimensions in Medical Ethics. Frederick, Md: University Publishing Group; 1992: 57–72.
71.
Antes P. Medicine and the living tradition of Islam. In: Sullivan L, ed. Healing and Restoring: Health and Medicine
in the World’s Religious Traditions. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company; 1989:173–202.
72.
Optiz K. Die Medizin im Koran. Stuttgart, Germany; 1906.
73.
Rahman F. Islam and health/medicine: A historical perspective. In: Sullivan L, ed. Healing and Restoring: Health
and Medicine in the World’s Religious Traditions. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company; 1989: 149–172.
74.
Rahman A, Amine C, Elkadi A. Islamic code of medical professional ethics. In: Veatch R, ed. Cross Cultural
Perspectives in Medical Ethics: Readings. Boston: Jones & Bartlett Publishers; 1989: 120–126.
75.
Serour GI. Islam and the four principles. In: Gillon R, ed. Principles of Health Care Ethics. New York: Wiley; 1994:
75–91.
76.
Haffner L. Cross cultural medicine a decade later: Translation is not enough. West J Med. 1992;157(3):255–259.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
718
77.
Woloshin S, Bickell N, Schwartz L, Gany F, Welch G. Language barriers in medicine in the United States. JAMA.
1995;273(9):724–728.
78.
Leininger M. The need for transcultural nursing. Second Opin. 1992;17(4):83–85.
79.
Katz J. The Silent World of Doctor and Patient. New York: Free Press; 1984.
80.
Swanson JW, McCrary SV. Doing all they can: Physicians who deny medical futility. J Law Med Ethics.
1994;22(4):318–326.
81.
American Psychiatric Association. Guidelines regarding possible conflict between psychiatrists’ religious commitments and psychiatric practice. Am J Psychiatry. 1989;147(4):543.
82.
Torrey E. Witchdoctors and Psychiatrists: The Common Roots of Psychotherapy and Its Future. New York: Harper
and Row; 1986. Quoted by: Post SG. Psychiatry, religious conversion, and medical ethics. Kennedy Inst Ethics J.
1991;1(3):207–223.
83.
Post SG. Psychiatry, religious conversion, and medical ethics. Kennedy Inst Ethics J. 1991;1(3):207–223.
84.
Caralis P, Davis B, Wright K, Marcial E. The influence of ethnicity and race on attitudes toward advance directives, life-prolonging treatments, and euthanasia. J Clin Ethics. 1993;4(2):155–165.
