Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
805
Chapter 25
MILITARY HUMANITARIAN
ASSISTANCE: THE PITFALLS AND
PROMISE OF GOOD INTENTIONS
ELSPETH CAMERON RITCHIE, MD*; AND ROBERT L. MOTT, MD, MPH†
INTRODUCTION
Types of US Military Humanitarian Missions
Why Is the US Military Involved in Humanitarian Assistance?
PEACETIME ENGAGEMENT PROJECTS AND DISASTER RELIEF OPERATIONS
Peacetime Engagement Projects: The Planned Provision of Care
The Pitfalls of Peacetime Engagement Projects
Establishing Quality Peacetime Engagement Projects
Disaster Relief Operations: Meeting Emergent Needs
CONFLICT-RELATED CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS
Aspects of Providing Civilian Medical Care During Contingency Operations
Balancing Allocation of Medical Resources
Establishing Mission Priorities and Their Implementation
Increasing Security in Conflict–Related Contingency Operations
“TAKING CARE OF” THE CAREGIVERS
CONCLUSION
*Lieutenant Colonel, Medical Corps, United States Army; formerly, Executive Officer, 528th Combat Stress Control Unit, Mogadishu, Somalia; formerly, Chief, Forensic Psychiatry, Walter Reed Health Care System, Washington, DC; currently, Program Director, Mental Health
Policy and Women’s Health Issues, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Health Affairs, Skyline 5, Suite 601, 5111 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church,
Virginia 22041-3206
†Major, Medical Corps, United States Army; formerly, Civil-Military Policy Analyst, Medical Humanitarian Assistance Policy and Programs, Office of the Secretary of Defense, The Pentagon, Washington, DC; currently, Deputy Director, General Preventive Medicine Residency, United States Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Building 503,
Silver Spring, Maryland 20910-7500
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
806
Joseph Hirsch
Safe
Cassino, Italy
A Medical Corpsman comforting two orphans. This sketch, from the Mediterranean Theater of Operations, exemplifies the ideals of humanitarian missions. This chapter highlights some of the pitfalls of these missions, in order to
avoid tragedy in future situations.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC. Available at: http://
www.armymedicine.army.mil/history/art/mto.htm.
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
807
INTRODUCTION
aid. This chapter outlines basic ethical questions
encountered in humanitarian operations, namely
those questions involving who military healthcare
professionals will treat, what care will be provided,
and the ramifications of providing that care. Both
the potential pros and cons of providing medical
assistance will be presented. The chapter is intended
to help guide the physician, medical decision planner, and the commander, using case studies to illustrate these dilemmas. Some of the case studies
are factual; others have been modified to illustrate
an ethical dilemma. Few absolute answers can be
given because situations vary depending on resources, need, and the tactical and political situation. Although this chapter raises concerns about
the conduct of certain humanitarian projects, it
should not be viewed as an indictment of military
humanitarian assistance programs.
Types of US Military Humanitarian Missions
Humanitarian missions can be divided into two
broad categories: (1) operations where the primary
medical goal is the care of civilians and (2) operations where the care of military personnel is the
focus of military medics (Exhibit 25-1). Each of these
missions can involve the direct care of civilians even
though the underlying goals, circumstances, and
ethical challenges may differ greatly.
EXHIBIT 25-1
TYPES OF US MILITARY MEDICAL
OPERATIONS
Operations where the primary medical goal is
the care of civilians
•
Peacetime engagement programs (such
as MEDCAPs [Medical Civic Action Programs])
•
Disaster relief
•
Dislocated civilian/refugee operations
•
Noncombatant evacuation order (NEO)
operations
Operations where the primary medical goal is
the care of military forces
•
War/combat operations
•
Peacekeeping
The United States military is routinely deployed
around the globe to conduct a broad spectrum of missions. These missions range from peacetime engagement or “development” projects at one extreme to
major theater wartime operations at the other. Within
each of these missions, military medical professionals may be called on to provide aid to civilians. There
is a rich history of direct military aid to civilians as
described in the previous chapter. Given the end of
the Cold War and the US military’s increasing involvement in military operations other than war (MOOTW),
the issues inherent in providing medical assistance to
indigenous populations will become increasingly
important to commanders and medical planners.
The benefit of military medical forces providing
assistance to injured, sick, and wounded civilians
seems obvious. In many operations, there is a suffering population that is in desperate need of medical assistance. Some of these individuals may have
been injured, intentionally or not, by US forces.
Other individuals represent the range of human
afflictions found in any area that has been lacking
adequate medical care for a prolonged period.
But there are potential pitfalls, often not considered, to providing this assistance. Many military
clinicians increasingly question whether the tenet
to “first, do no harm” is being followed when the
United States military provides medical assistance
to developing countries. It is troubling to ponder
the possibility that individuals or a population
might be worse off after receiving American military medical assistance.
Although there is a long history of militaries providing humanitarian assistance to suffering populations, there is a dearth of international law, policy
guidance, and doctrine for the types of complex operations that military medical planners and professionals face. Much of the “Law of War,” as codified
by the Geneva Convention of 1947 and the subsequent
Protocols, does not apply to contemporary armed conflicts. 1,2 Usually the warring parties are not sovereign
nations (typical of past conflicts) but ethnic minorities or religious factions fighting within the borders
of a single country. There is little guidance available
for the physician or other healthcare professional to
follow on how to ethically prioritize medical care in
conflicts in the post–Cold-War era. Different military
services and different nations often have little, or conflicting, guidance on whom to treat.
Most American physicians, including those in the
military, are not aware of the potentially serious
problems caused by inappropriate humanitarian
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
808
Peacetime Engagement Projects and Disaster
Relief Operations
Peacetime engagement projects (authorized under
Title 10 US Code, Section 401) are principally intended as training missions for US military forces
while also providing nonthreatening engagement
opportunities with foreign nations. By statute, medical activities authorized by Section 401 are limited
to the provision of medical care in rural areas of a
country. These projects are variously referred to as
Medical Civic Action Programs (MEDCAPs) and
Medical Readiness Training Exercises (MEDRETEs).
A number of papers have been written detailing the
conduct of these activities, the benefits derived, and
some of the ethical and operational issues encountered. 3–7 Some of these issues will be explored in
more detail later in this chapter. Disaster relief operations are technically contingency operations.
However, because the primary goal of these missions is to provide relief to the local population, the
ethical issues raised are more closely aligned to
peacetime engagement projects.
Conflict-Related Contingency Operations
In international contingency operations the US
military may, under Title 10 US Code, Section 2551
(which permits the Department of Defense [DoD]
to use funds for “other humanitarian purposes
worldwide”), provide assistance to civilians. US
military medical assistance to civilians may be central to the mission, as in complex humanitarian
emergencies, or it may be provided on an as-available basis during more typical military operations.
Military forces rarely have primary responsibility for the care of civilians, especially in operations
that fall short of war. Instead, civilian governmental, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and
international organizations (IOs) have the lead for
both development and relief activities. The United
States Department of State, the US Agency for International Development (USAID), and various
United Nations agencies are major providers of
humanitarian aid. NGOs provide much of the manpower for on-the-ground relief and development
programs while the military, if present at all, is generally in a supporting role. Some civilian aid organizations have been critical of military involvement
in humanitarian operations even in a supporting
role. 8 As an example, Médecins Sans Frontiéres [Doctors Without Borders] (MSF), a well-respected NGO,
released the following as part of a 9 October 2001
press statement objecting to US military airdrops
of humanitarian supplies to civilians in Afghanistan in October of 2001. “Providing aid to vulnerable populations under the sway of armed factions
in a politically charged climate is always very difficult. Ultimately it rests on demonstrating that the
motives for helping are purely humanitarian and
divorced from any ulterior political, military, or religious agenda.…MSF is extremely concerned that
there are clear risks in associating humanitarian aid
with military operations. MSF believes strongly that
for humanitarian aid to be effective, it must not be
encumbered by political or military motives.”
Why Is the US Military Involved
in Humanitarian Assistance?
The primary missions of a military are to defend
the homeland and protect national interests abroad.
Some individuals and organizations in the United
States as well as other countries assert that the military should not be involved in humanitarian or nation-building activities. They argue that a military
is an inappropriate provider of humanitarian services and that humanitarian operations negatively
impact the true military mission—fighting and winning the nation’s wars. 9,10 Why, then, is the US military increasingly called on to provide humanitarian aid? One answer is that nations have a moral
imperative to assist people in need. In addition,
these programs provide certain benefits to the
United States while also benefiting, to some degree,
the local population of these other countries. Other
reasons for US military involvement in humanitarian activities include:
• humanitarian imperative,
• unique military capabilities,
• public relations,
• to legitimize military operations,
• engagement with a foreign government, and
• training for US forces.
Many governments have special nonmilitary
agencies that are responsible for international disaster response. The Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) under USAID is the lead agency
for the United States. However, these agencies may
not be structured to handle massive humanitarian
requirements without military assistance. Few organizations outside of the military have the capacity to quickly move materiel, establish secure routes
for aid delivery, develop command and control
mechanisms, and provide direct assistance. This is
changing somewhat as civilian aid agencies increase
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
809
their logistics and communication capacities and as
contract transportation assets become more available.
Even if these nonmilitary organizations have the
necessary resources for these events, there may still
be political pressure from various groups in the
United States (for example, those with the same ethnic heritage as the affected group) on the US military to provide assistance as a show of American
support. The humanitarian imperative also arises
during combat operations. Military commanders
and medical professionals often feel a moral obligation to assist the suffering civilian population,
especially when they have the trained personnel
and medical equipment readily available.
Humanitarian operations also benefit the American political process by showing other countries the
diverse American population working together to
achieve common goals and thus improving global
public relations. The deployment of military forces
to assist with a foreign emergency is a very visible
show of support for a foreign government and its
people. In addition, there is the symbolism of a large
military aircraft with an American flag on its tail
unloading relief supplies. A photograph of a US
medic caring for a needy child is equally compelling.
Healthcare for civilians may be used to legitimize
Fig 25-1. These three photographs, taken during Operation Uphold Democracy (Haiti, 1994), depict what can
be characterized as ideal humanitarian operations: a clear
need for intervention, a genuine welcome from the local
population, and a sense of doing good things for people
who need American help. This operation was in direct
response to increasing numbers of Haitian migrants fleeing the conditions in their country and attempting to
make the dangerous ocean journey to American shores.
The United States intervened in Haiti to halt the migrant
crisis and to complete the lawful change in power that
should have occurred following the democratic election
of a new president in Haiti. American forces remained
in Haiti in the months following the change of power to
a
b
c
assist in infrastructure development to ensure continued stability in the new democracy. (a) “Haitians run through
the crowd at the Presidential Palace, Port-au-Prince, Haiti supporting the American involvement in the return of
President Jean Bertrand Aristide on 15 October 1994.” Image and caption: The DoD Joint Combat Camera Center
(JCCC), American Forces Information Services, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs). US Forces in Haiti,
Image #220, JCCC Reference: J3107-SCN-94-20766. Combat camera photo by PH1 Robert N. Scoggin, US Navy.
(b) “Outside the Port-au-Prince Airport, Haitians rally in support of American troops forcing out General Cedras and
protecting their city’s streets, at Port-au-Prince Airport, Haiti during Operation Uphold Democracy.” Image and
caption: The DoD Joint Combat Camera Center, American Forces Information Services, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs). US Forces in Haiti, Image #276, JCCC Reference: J3107-SPT-94-20196. Combat camera photo by
A1C Sean Worrell, US Air Force. (c )“‘Sammy,’ a Haitian child injured [the week before] in a grenade attack, arrives at
the 5th Mobile Army Surgical Hospital (MASH) at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, where he will be reunited with his
mother.” Image and caption: The DoD Joint Combat Camera Center, American Forces Information Services, Assistant
Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs). US Forces in Haiti, Image #305, JCCC Reference: J3107-SPT-94-20468. Combat
camera photo by Spec Brian Gavin, US Army.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
810
a military operation. Traditionally, informally the
Special Forces medics treat the local populations in
an attempt to win their “hearts and minds.” This
grateful population may then, at least theoretically, be
more likely to aid American interests, for instance by
providing information about the whereabouts of the
enemy. There is also the likelihood of damaging publicity and a loss of legitimacy if US medical personnel
refuse to treat a dying child or an accident victim.
Medical engagement projects during peacetime
are also a low-threat means of introducing a foreign nation to the US military. Medical engagement
projects may be the first contact that a foreign government and military has with American forces and,
if conducted well, may be a good way to break longstanding negative stereotypes. This is particularly
true in countries previously aligned with former
adversaries. Humanitarian deployments are a way
of sending the message to the local population that
their government is supported by the United States.
These populations can then begin to see, in a tangible way, the benefits of a continuing relationship
with the United States. This also can be a very satisfying experience for US military forces providing
this assistance (Figure 25-1). Thus a successfully
conducted humanitarian deployment can be the
first step in a long-term relationship that improves
the everyday lives of the local population while
providing training benefits to the US military. These
humanitarian projects also provide an opportunity
to teach and demonstrate key central principles of
the US military to foreign governments and militaries. These principles include civilian control of
the military and respect for human rights.
There are several types of training benefits to
American military medical forces. The most readily
apparent benefit comes from the fact that operations
in developing countries, particularly those in the
tropics, expose US healthcare professionals to diseases rarely seen in Western hospitals, such as tropical diseases, nutritional deficiencies, and advanced
cancers. These missions permit medical units to
practice real-world deployments, work with foreign
military personnel, and operate in austere environments. Some units have used such deployments as
a lab to develop new equipment and procedures. 11
Many National Guard and Reserve medical units
also deploy on humanitarian missions because the
missions are considered valuable training and retention tools.
PEACETIME ENGAGEMENT PROJECTS AND DISASTER RELIEF OPERATIONS
Peacetime engagement projects and disaster relief operations are inherently different—one is
planned, the other emergent—but they are discussed together in this chapter because the main
focus of each is to provide humanitarian assistance
to a civilian population. This differs from the contingency operations discussed in the next section
where the main goal of medical assets is to provide
care to military forces. Many criticisms described
here are also valid for humanitarian assistance provided by nonmilitary organizations.
Peacetime Engagement Projects: The Planned
Provision of Care
Direct medical engagement projects involve the
provision of acute medical care to people in rural
areas of developing countries (Figure 25-2). Many
of these MEDCAPs focus on primary care where
several hundred patients are evaluated and treated
per day for common illnesses and injuries. This is
sometimes referred to as “tailgate medicine” because
care is provided out of the back of a truck or within
a local structure such as a school or small clinic.
Tailgate MEDCAPs may also include dental care
and optometry. Other MEDCAPs involve elective
surgical procedures such as cataract removal or cleft
palate repair. The common elements of MEDCAPs
are that they are primarily for the training of US
military personnel, they are only a few days in duration, and they provide rudimentary care to patients
in austere environments. Other medical engagement projects include the donation of excess DoD
medical equipment, preventive medicine programs,
and training for host nation providers.
The Pitfalls of Peacetime Engagement Projects
Despite the putative benefits described above,
the true value of military “peacetime engagement”
activities is questioned for many reasons. Much of
the criticism centers on the quality of the patient–
physician relationship although there are larger
programmatic concerns as well as questions about
the actual training value for US medical personnel.
These criticisms are summarized in Exhibit 25-2.
The benefits derived from these missions may be
offset if they are not carefully planned and executed,
as the following case study illustrates:
Case Study 25-1: A MEDCAP Exercise in Rural Africa. A young Army physician was excited about a
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
811
MEDCAP exercise in rural Africa. “I was finally going to
travel the world, see tropical diseases that I had only read
about in textbooks, and provide medical care to people
who had rarely, if ever, seen a doctor. But during the mission my excitement turned to frustration. I began to question the quality of the care that I was able to provide and
the long-term benefit to the population. I questioned my
ability to make a correct diagnosis because of my limited
expertise and our lack of lab and x-ray services. I also
began to doubt the training value of the trip. I couldn’t
EXHIBIT 25-2
THE PITFALLS OF PEACETIME ENGAGEMENT PROJECTS
Inability to establish an effective patient–physician relationship
•
Lack of knowledge of endemic diseases, may base diagnoses on “Western” medical experience
•
Lack of knowledge of, or consideration for, local customs and beliefs
•
Questionable patient understanding and compliance
Constraints on the ability to provide quality diagnostic and medical care
•
Lack of diagnostic capabilities
•
Nonmedical personnel often provide care
•
Inadequate referral, continuity of care, and follow-up
Inability to provide long-term assistance
•
Short-term focus
•
Inadequate planning and coordination
•
Disrupt local health care systems
•
Underlying causes of disease not addressed
•
Raise expectations, cause dissatisfaction with local medical resources
•
Lack of evaluation
Questionable training value for US military medical personnel
•
Treat more curious people than those with true disease
•
Focus on quantity of patients seen instead of quality of care and training
Fig. 25-2. A Somali refugee camp outside the American compound illustrates the primitive condition of the camps,
with huts of donated plastic tarps and no running water, electricity, sewage, or other basic necessities. Photograph:
Courtesy of Lieutenant Colonel Elspeth Cameron Ritchie, MD.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
812
differentiate a malaria case from a viral infection and we
didn’t have an experienced clinician on the team who
could teach me how. The exercise commander didn’t really care what we did as long as we kept the patient numbers up. Even if my diagnosis and treatment were correct, I had serious questions about my patients’ ability to
understand and follow my directions. I later discovered
that other physicians had had similar experiences.”
Comment: This young physician had been initially altruistic about his forthcoming MEDCAP, but was disappointed by the actual experience. It is likely that he shared
his disillusionment with other physicians when he returned
to his unit. Furthermore, this experience may have had
long-term adverse consequences on his confidence in
himself as a physician, and in the value of the mission.
Better mission planning, combined with more realistic expectations, might have lessened his disillusionment.
This case study illustrates several dangers: (a) lack of
knowledge of local diseases, (b) inadequate time to assess a patient, (c) no diagnostic facilities, and (d) poor
communication with the patients. The problems inherent
in a compromised patient–physician relationship are
readily apparent.
Inability to Establish an Effective Patient–
Physician Relationship
The patient–physician relationship is central to
the delivery of quality medical care. (See Chapter
1, The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician
Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics, for a
further discussion of this relationship.) In Western
medicine, the patient trusts that the physician has
the proper training, experience, resources, and focus to provide the best quality of care possible. If
the physician is unable to provide appropriate care
because of inadequate experience or resources, the
patient expects to be referred to a physician who
can provide the proper care. Patients also may believe that their physician will be available to continue to care for them if there are problems with a
prescribed treatment. The physician trusts the patient to provide an accurate history and to follow
the treatment directions closely.
During MEDCAPs this “ideal” relationship does
not, and cannot, exist. Most American-trained physicians are not experienced in diagnosing and treating many of the diseases of the developing world
such as tropical diseases and nutritional deficiencies. Because of this, they are underqualified to diagnose and treat many of the problems that present
during a MEDCAP. (This may be changing as more
healthcare workers are trained in disaster or tropical medicine.) This is particularly true on missions
where the diagnosis is based solely on a quick history and physical examination without the benefit
of lab or radiographic services. The following case
study emphasizes this point:
Case Study 25-2: Diagnosis of Local Diseases. An
American military surgeon in Vietnam was asked to see
a middle-aged man who had high spiking fevers and episodes of generalized rigor. The surgeon evaluated this
patient as he would have any patient he had seen in his
years of medical practice. “On examination, I found diffuse tenderness all over but especially in the [lower] abdomen. Although we couldn’t converse—no translator was
around—I was in no doubt of the diagnosis: a perforated
appendix. He needs a lap[arotomy]! So we went to the
OR [operating room] and under general anesthesia I made
a small right lower quadrant incision and found a normal
appendix. An internist was available and made the suggestion that maybe the patient had malaria. I had never
seen a case of malaria…and, of course, that was the right
diagnosis.”
Comment: This patient was fortunate that the internist
on the scene had knowledge of local diseases and could
readily spot malaria. If at all possible, American healthcare
professionals in non-American settings should familiarize themselves as much as possible with local diseases,
and should further seek out the knowledge or experience
of the local medical establishment whenever possible.
The issue of “noncredentialed” or even nonmedical personnel providing care must also be addressed. Is it ethical for nonmedical personnel, such
as Special Forces soldiers, to perform medical procedures on civilians such as starting intravenous
(IV) fluids, performing minor surgery, or extracting teeth if they are not permitted to do this in the
United States? Is it right for an enlisted medic to
practice medicine independently without oversight
by a licensed medical professional? These activities
have been justified by the argument that the care
that they provide is better than no care at all. Yet
does this betray the trust of the patient if he believes
a fully trained clinician is providing the care? We
believe these practices are less than optimal because
they provide substandard medical care. Furthermore, the local population and officials might reasonably expect that they are receiving “American
medicine” and may be troubled if they learn that
this is not the case. Sometimes, however, this may
be the only care available in an emergency.
The patient side of the patient–physician relationship is also problematic during MEDCAPs. Language difficulties create obvious communication
shortfalls. An interpreter, or even the patient, may
also have difficulty answering a question such as,
“How much does it hurt?” as the actual acknowledgment of pain may vary between cultures. Many
people in underserved areas of the developing
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
813
world are unfamiliar with the basic concepts and
phrases of Western medicine and may be unwilling or unable to discuss their symptoms in a way
that the American physician can understand. Cultural differences and variations in medical knowledge and sophistication further complicate communication. Patient expectation of what the physician
might want to hear can also impede effective diagnosis. Patient understanding, and thus informed
consent, is often inadequate.
Compliance with medication, although usually
unknown, is probably poor. Many of these patients
may not be familiar with the different classes of
drugs (analgesics, antiinflammatories, antibiotics,
and so forth) or the different causes of disease (nutritional, bacterial, viral) and the most appropriate
treatments for each. Pills may be swapped in favor
of a different color or size without consideration of
the actual purpose of the medication. Herbal-based
local medical practices may exacerbate this, especially if local preparations of a certain color, size,
or shape are “good” for local ailments. For example,
a blue antibiotic that is contraindicated for a pregnant woman may be swapped for an orange antiinflammatory. Non-Western patients may also believe
that if one pill is good then 20 must be better. Common, seemingly harmless medications such as acetaminophen and iron supplements can be fatal if
taken in these quantities. Conversely, patients may
only take a portion of their prescribed course of
medication, stopping when symptoms resolve. The
remaining medications may be saved for a future
illness or perhaps for sale. Because the full course
of medication is necessary to cure the illness, this
practice could lead to inadequate therapy and the
development of antibiotic resistance.
Unrealistic patient expectations can further complicate these already difficult patient–physician interactions. The following example illustrates several of
these problems, including inadequate assessments,
medicine swapping, and anger at the healthcare professionals when patients’ needs are not met. The unifying factor was the failure of effective communication.
Case Study 25-3: “Good Intentions” Left in the Latrine. A small medical team consisting of primary care
clinicians, nurses, and enlisted medics deployed on a
medical training exercise in rural Africa. After arriving in
the village selected for the MEDCAP, the team leader met
with village elders to gain their support and to ask that
they “spread the word” that the American healthcare professionals would be seeing patients the next day. The
team then set up a rudimentary outpatient clinic in the
local school.
Early the next morning, the US providers were astonished to find hundreds of people milling around the school
waiting to be seen. Some of these patients had walked
for hours to receive care. In order to evaluate as many
people as possible the team decided to stop taking vital
signs because it was taking too long. As more patients
were seen, it became apparent that many of the patients
were really more curious than actually sick. This was evident when entire families presented with the same vague,
nonspecific chief complaint. Rapid patient histories and
examinations were performed with the aid of an interpreter
but doctor and patient understanding was often questionable. For example, when asked through the interpreter
how many children she had, a mother responded back
through the interpreter that her head hurt.
After brief history and physical examinations the clinicians made diagnoses without the aid of laboratory or
imaging studies and then prescribed medication. The clinicians felt frustrated by their inability to accurately diagnose the causes of fever and abdominal pain. Only one
of them had previously seen a case of malaria. Despite
the fact that most patients were not particularly sick, they
all nonetheless received some type of medication or a
vitamin supplement. Multiple types of pills were routinely
given to a single family, often consisting of antibiotics,
pain and fever relievers, and vitamins. The pills were given
to the head of household in small plastic bags with instructions written in English, which he was unlikely to be
able to read.
In the midst of the crowd of curious and mildly ill patients were several patients who were genuinely quite ill,
presenting with advanced or chronic conditions that could
not be managed by the US providers. One man became
quite angry when told that his crippling condition was
beyond the scope of the MEDCAP’s capabilities. During
a short break, one of the American providers witnessed
two women trading medication, an antibiotic for an antiinflammatory. When asked about the exchange one
woman responded that orange tablets have more magical power than the blue. The same provider later noticed
a scattering of dark pills at the bottom of the school’s open
pit latrine. The doctors later learned that black was seen
as the color of death.
At 1600 the MEDCAP staff had to stop seeing patients
in order to stay on schedule with the overall military exercise. Several dozen people became angry when they were
turned away without being seen. A couple of rocks hit
one of the MEDCAP vehicles as the team drove out of
the village.
Comment: This case study typifies “good intentions”
that didn’t translate into effective medical care. The village elders had certainly done what was asked of them,
in terms of spreading the word that the American
healthcare team would be available. There was, however,
a lack of understanding as to who should be seen by such
a team, or perhaps there was no lack of understanding,
only an overriding curiosity. Once the masses had arrived,
however, there was no effective mechanism for quickly
sorting through them to locate the most seriously ill, or to
ensure that everyone was seen, even if only momentarily.
Nor was there was a mechanism for turning the curious
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
814
away. Finally, the healthcare professionals were unable
to address the difference in cultural experiences of the
providers vs the patients. The MEDCAP staff thus erred in
assuming that their directions would or could be followed.
Constraints on the Ability to Provide Quality
Diagnostic and Medical Care
There are programmatic concerns about engagement activities that are larger than the patient–physician relationship. These projects are often of very
short duration and do not have a lasting impact. 12
Furthermore, even the short-term impact of a
project may actually be more negative than positive. In Rwanda, for instance, an NGO hired away
the few remaining medical staff (most had been
slaughtered during the genocide) from the struggling governmental health care clinic. 13 In addition,
a well-resourced and staffed MEDCAP might raise
the medical expectations of the local population
causing them to become dissatisfied with the standard of care that the host nation is usually able to
provide. The donation of a large quantity of medications may seem beneficial but it may be counterproductive if local providers are unsure of its proper
use or if the free medication competes with a struggling local pharmaceutical market. The local population may also come to believe that their medicine
is not as good as the “American pills.”
Inability to Provide Long-Term Assistance
The attempts to gain the “hearts and minds” may
also backfire. If Americans are perceived as treating only one clan, the others may be angry. Often
the treating physicians are not aware of these clan
affiliations. If the locals come to expect treatment
and then the treating hospital pulls out or stops
providing care, resentment may be created. Expectations of continuing treatment and convalescent
care may be raised. Indeed, the local populations
may expect “miracles,” or the treatment of conditions for which there is no cure, for example, some
congenital malformations, some types of blindness,
some debilitating chronic conditions, or terminal
illness.
Another major issue is that acute care MEDCAPs
often do not address the underlying causes of disease such as insect vectors, contaminated water,
malnutrition, and poor sanitation and hygiene. 12 It
may be futile or counterproductive for US military
healthcare professionals to treat diseases caused by
poor sanitation and hygiene without also addressing these underlying conditions as well. People may
be less inclined to make preventive environmental
or behavioral changes when they know that there
are curative treatments, even if they are temporary.
Finally, even if enormous volumes of patients are
seen, some people may inevitably be turned away.
Unfortunately, these may be the people who have
traveled the furthest or waited the longest to receive
care. It is easy to understand their anger if they do
not receive care. This may alienate rather than make
friends of the local population.
Questionable Training Value for US Military
Medical Personnel
A major stated reason for conducting these medical humanitarian peacetime engagement projects is
to train US military medical personnel to identify
and treat unfamiliar diseases in austere environments. Unfortunately, many MEDCAPs are not designed for training. Instead they are geared toward
generating large numbers of patient encounters to
“show the host nation how much we care.” Time
consuming diagnostic procedures may be set aside
in the interest of the patient count. Teaching becomes much less pressing than seeing the hundreds
of patients waiting outside. The fact that many of
the “patients” are really reasonably healthy, and
EXHIBIT 25-3
NECESSARY ACTIONS FOR A
SUCCESSFUL MEDICAL
HUMANITARIAN PROJECT
•
Coordinate project planning and implementation with other humanitarian organizations
•
Consider and minimize unintended consequences of medical intervention
•
Ensure “local ownership” of project to assist with communication, asset allocation,
and background information necessary
for successful project
•
Provide quality medical services, including diagnostic assets
•
Institute and maintain proper continuity
of care, follow-up, and program evaluation
•
Maximize training benefit, when appropriate, for US forces
•
Provide necessary assets and training for
program to be sustainable
•
Build local capacity to ensure program
continuity
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
815
they may make up a complaint just to see an American physician, makes the training value of many
MEDCAPs less than ideal. Finally, many of these
exercises lack any personnel who have experience
with tropical diseases and this reduces the training
benefit.
Establishing Quality Peacetime Engagement
Programs
US military medical planners at all levels of responsibility must take a leading role to insure that
medical engagement projects provide excellent
training for US forces while still providing quality
medical care to local populations. Previously, Hood14
and Luz and colleagues15 described criteria that
might be useful for planning, executing, and evaluating medical civic action programs. These and
other criteria are summarized in Exhibit 25-3.
It should be obvious that a successful and ethical humanitarian mission should be centered on
high-quality services. Yet as outlined above, problems such as limited resources, inexperienced planners and healthcare professionals, and command
pressure to “get the numbers up,” all serve to reduce the quality of care provided.
Physicians should object strongly when quality
of care is threatened unnecessarily by external factors such as patient counts and political favors. US
military medical professionals must be trained,
equipped, and provided the necessary resources to
correctly diagnose and safely and ethically treat
diseases that are within the scope of care of the
project. Predeployment training on the diagnosis
and management of endemic diseases should be
mandatory.
Because the capabilities of the US medical professionals will usually be surpassed at some point
during an exercise, it is critically important to have
emergency and referral mechanisms in place before
the project begins. This requires careful coordination with civilian medical providers and institutions. Project leaders should insist that experienced,
competent host nation physicians work beside US
military healthcare professionals on all MEDCAPs.
Coordination must also be made with officials at
all levels of the host government as well as with
local organizations that will likely be affected by
the project, in order to benefit from their experience and to learn of potential problems that may
be encountered during the planned project. Furthermore, coordinating the project with individuals and
agencies within the community will provide that
community with a sense of ownership of the project
and lessen problems that may arise. As the following case study illustrates, the limitations of the mission must also be stressed to the local population
so it doesn’t expect a small rudimentary MEDCAP
to have the capabilities of a large American hospital.
Case Study 25-4: Communicating MEDCAP Limitations to a Local Population. A team of military primary care clinicians was conducting a small MEDCAP in
a remote area, 1 hour by road from the nearest significant medical treatment facility. At midday, the pregnant
wife of a district official was brought to the MEDCAP site
hemorrhaging and in obvious distress. Her family had
brought her to the MEDCAP instead of the local hospital
because they felt the presence of US physicians would
guarantee a high standard of care for this critical patient.
Unfortunately, they did not understand that this MEDCAP
project was not equipped for this type of emergency. Further, the US healthcare staff had not planned for life and
death emergencies and thus referral procedures had not
been established with the host nation providers. Because
the MEDCAP team lacked the medical resources to care
for this critical patient, she was sent on to the local hospital by truck, but died en route.
Comment: Before the arrival of a MEDCAP team, especially in a geographic area that has not experienced
such an event in the recent past, it is desirable to familiarize local officials with the MEDCAP project and what
the team will be doing. This might involve showing them
photographs of the typical visit in order to convey the
basics of the program: short duration, non–life-threatening situations with generally ambulatory patients. Had the
family known in advance what the MEDCAP’s team limitations were, the patient could have been taken to a more
appropriate medical facility, and might have survived. (It
is possible that in this case the woman’s family might have
still brought her to the MEDCAP, thinking that “American
medicine” in any form was preferable to what was available at the nearest local hospital.)
When planning activities, it is important to consider local capabilities and customs to be certain
that the patient-care activity or donated technology
is appropriate. For example, it may be inappropriate for male US providers to examine or even speak
to female patients. A village may lack the resources
to operate or maintain a donated x-ray machine. It
is certainly better to learn about and address these
issues early in the planning cycle rather than during the mission. The best way to avoid pitfalls is
through careful and detailed discussions with the
people who will be receiving the services, if at all
possible.
Projects should at least partially bring lasting
benefit to the area beyond the brief time period of
the project itself. This may involve installing a water
pump to provide a supply of clean water in addiMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
816
tion to providing acute medical care, or increasing
the capacity of local medical providers and public
health officials to address the ongoing needs of the
population. Equipping a clinic and training local
medical professionals to use and maintain that
equipment is an example of a capacity building
mission that has a lasting benefit to the community.
Finally, it is critical to consider unintended consequences during project planning and coordination in order to minimize potential problems. A
“brainstorming” session should be conducted with
local area experts to try to identify the ways that
various parties might misinterpret a project and
how the project might cause harm. Ways to mitigate those issues should then be identified. Discussing plans with local leaders, NGOs, and others will
help to identify potential problems early. If significant problems cannot be adequately addressed then
serious consideration should be given to canceling
the project.
There are certainly MEDCAPs that do an excellent job of training US medical personnel and providing quality services. The missions organized by
Joint Task Force-Bravo (JTF-B) in Honduras are one
example. (Chapter 24, Military Medicine in Humanitarian Missions, describes this in some detail.)
These missions are well-coordinated with the Honduran medical system in part because Honduran
physicians are on the JTF-B staff. These individuals
coordinate medical engagement activities with the
Honduran Government and local providers. They
also train and orient US staff members who rotate
through Honduras on humanitarian missions. The
ongoing presence of the JTF enhances emergency
referral, patient follow-up, and continuity of care.
Unfortunately JTF-B is a somewhat unique organization. Most other countries lack a similar long-term
presence and that negatively affects their ability to
plan, coordinate, and execute quality programs.
Surgically oriented MEDCAPs can also be very
successful if they are well-planned, equipped,
staffed, and coordinated. Cleft palate and cataract
surgery are two procedures that provide long-term
benefit to their patients while allowing the US surgeons to operate in an austere environment. Longterm relationships with host nation hospitals and
physicians help guarantee appropriate cases and
follow-up.
There are many lessons that US military healthcare
professionals and planners have learned from their
past experiences in providing peacetime medical
humanitarian assistance. Some of these lessons are
very obvious; others are not. Among these lessons are:
• Large MEDCAPs that deploy robust ancillary staff and services can do a better job
than MEDCAPs that deploy small, underresourced teams.
• Large MEDCAPs tend to be well-planned
and coordinated; they attract more host
nation support and direct participation.
• Small MEDCAPs can provide quality training and services with careful planning and
coordination.
• The quality of patient care provided can be
improved by teaming up with experienced
local physicians in the outpatient service of a
district hospital; choosing a hospital that has
quality diagnostic services, a good mix of interesting cases, and experienced physicians
who are interested in teaching increases the
likelihood of a positive outcome for both patient and the healthcare professional.
• It is unnecessary, and often counterproductive, to advertise that US providers will be
seeing patients; maintaining a low profile
will help avoid huge numbers of patients
and those who are more curious than sick.
• The educational experience and the quality of care is more important than the number of patients seen; if the MEDCAP commander and the host country understand
that good training and quality services outweigh the fleeting benefit of a large patient
count they will be more supportive of fewer
patients being seen.
• If an “all-comer” MEDCAP is still mandated, it is best to implement careful triage
and screening procedures to help insure
quality patient care and a good training
experience.
Dreher and Radoiu16 describe patient triage and
other procedures that were used on an optometry
MEDCAPs in Central America to enhance training
and patient care.
Disaster Relief Operations: Meeting Emergent
Needs
Even though disaster response has been a more
traditional role for militaries than engagement or
development activities, there are still pitfalls that
may be encountered. The main problems include a
lack of training and organization to properly manage disaster response, and the usual desire to provide the assistance directly rather than improving
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
817
the capacity of the local population to help themselves. This chapter will only briefly discuss military involvement in disaster relief operations because many of the ethical issues are similar to those
in peacetime engagements.
Military medical units are often sent to major
disasters to help the host nation care for victims and
prevent the spread of disease. Unfortunately, because of their wartime mission, organization, and
training the medical units are often ill-prepared for
disaster relief and occasionally make the situation
worse.
A fundamental cause of problems is that deployable medical units are configured to treat injuries
and illnesses in healthy, young combat troops. The
medical units are neither staffed nor equipped to
treat civilian populations that include infants, pregnant women, and the elderly. Standard equipment
sets are not designed with infants in mind and formularies do not include pediatric formulations and
medications to treat serious chronic illness. It is not
uncommon for clinicians in disaster situations to
be faced with complex acute and chronic diseases
such as advanced heart disease, uncontrolled diabetes, severe respiratory disease, and complicated
labor. Most of the smaller deployable hospitals,
those that are the most likely to deploy to a disaster, are not designed to manage these types of patients, especially in large numbers.
Another difficulty is that Western-trained military physicians are usually not trained to deal with
many of the medical and public health issues encountered in underdeveloped countries. Few military clinicians have managed a case of complicated
malaria or severe malnutrition and few military
public health professionals have had to deal with a
deadly outbreak of dysentery or measles. Medical
and public health interventions that are appropriate for the United States may be counterproductive
during disasters in developing nations. For example, the use of a reverse osmosis water purification unit (ROWPU) to produce high-quality water
may be too resource intensive and less effective
overall than simply pouring chlorine in buckets at
a water collection point.
The lack of cultural awareness may also complicate the delivery of quality medical care and public
health programs. For example, as previously mentioned, certain cultures do not permit male healthcare
professionals to examine female patients. Disaster
relief deployments to care for this population would
require a significant number of female personnel.
For public health, one common downfall is failing
to appreciate the sanitation practices of a culture
and consequently providing latrines that the population refuses to use.
A final issue is the impact of military medical
providers on humanitarian organizations and the
local population. Cooperating with, or accepting
care from, a military hospital may be viewed as a
breech of neutrality. This might incite the wrath of
warring parties that would at a minimum disrupt
relief efforts and may result in direct physical violence. The failure to gain the trust of local nationals
can also be a major roadblock for public health programs that often rely on local health workers to
implement effective community-based interventions. The following case study demonstrates some
of these issues.
Case Study 25-5: Adjusting Resource Consumption to the Mission Need. A Western government was
troubled by news stories showing thousands of people
dying of diarrhea in an emergency refugee camp. The
government responded by deploying a mobile military
hospital to the camp. On arrival, the hospital occupied a
large piece of ground in order to set up the hospital, quarters for the staff, and a perimeter for security. The hospital staff was soon inundated with hundreds of patients,
mostly children dying of dehydration. They immediately
began moving from patient to patient starting IVs and giving antibiotics. They were quickly overwhelmed and they
soon faced a shortage of IV solution and medication. Many
of the patients died before the hospital could be resupplied.
They later learned from an experienced NGO to mainly
use oral rehydration while reserving IVs for those patients
who couldn’t drink. They were amazed to see patients
near death improve dramatically with simple oral hydration. In their after-action report the physicians documented
that they were frustrated by their lack of preparation for
this type of emergency.
Comment: As with Case 25-3 (“Good Intentions” Left
in the Latrine), the Western staff applied Western medicine in a setting in which the specifics of the situation
should have been driving the response, rather than past
practices in a familiar setting. The utilization of large
amounts of resources (land, water, and so forth) and the
failure to adapt the treatment to the patient needs or sheer
numbers, prevented the team from being able to maximize their response to the magnitude of the medical need.
This example illustrates the resources that the
hospital consumed and also the inadequate training for military physicians in disaster medicine. An
official at the Pan American Health Organization
(PAHO) insists that mobile military hospitals are a
problem for disaster relief because they arrive after
the emergency phase, require excessive space and
resources, and they eventually redeploy leaving no
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
818
local medical capacity in their place. 17 It is often
better to send in teams to help establish a local permanent medical treatment facility that helps with
the disaster but also stays to treat the local population after the emergency is over.
Case Study 25-6: Tailoring the Organizational Response to the Local Need. After a devastating hurricane
in Central America, an appeal was made for international
assistance. A number of groups in the United States responded to this appeal by collecting large quantities of
medication and medical supplies to donate to the relief
effort. The US military was asked to transport many of
these donations to the disaster area. Unfortunately, the
labels and instructions on the donated medical supplies
were written in English, they had not been sorted by type
of medication before they were sent, and some were close
to or past their expiration dates. Not wanting to waste a
potentially valuable resource, the host government felt
compelled to use scarce medical manpower and resources to sort through the piles of medications, much of
which could not be used.
Comment: During a subsequent disaster, American
relief agencies only accepted cash donations. The funds
were then used to purchase appropriate medications and
supplies in the affected country. This insured cultural appropriateness while limiting waste and giving a boost to
the local economy.
Not all donations of medical goods have the
problems described in Case Study 25-6. An example
of a civilian donation of supplies in which the items
had been sorted and labeled before shipment to
Somalia is shown in Figure 25-3. This preliminary
sorting and labeling made the utilization of these
supplies more likely.
Medical care is considered a universal good by
Fig. 25-3. “Members from Aerial Port Squadrons from Dyess
Air Force Base, Texas, and Dover Air Force Base, Delaware,
download medical supplies donated by the people of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, for distribution in Somalia. Pallets were
then loaded onto waiting C-130 Hercules aircraft.” Image
and caption: The DoD Joint Combat Camera Center, American Forces Information Services, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs). US Forces in Somalia, Image #375.
Combat camera imagery by Sergeant Kimberly A. Yearyean.
most people but the inappropriate use of medical
assets during a disaster may be counterproductive.
Military medical planners and leaders must be prepared to recognize and resist relief efforts that can
not accomplish their goals in an appropriate manner.
CONFLICT-RELATED CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS
Aspects of Providing Civilian Medical Care
During Contingency Operations
This section will focus on operations in which
military medical forces are primarily structured and
staffed to provide medical care for the deployed
force, and thus medical care for the local population is not the focus of the mission. In those instances in which military medical professionals do
provide treatment to the local population, care must
be taken to ensure that the realities of a combat zone
are factored into the decision-making process. Case
Study 25-7 details such a situation.
Case Study 25-7: Providing Feasible Medical Care
to Indigenous Populations in a Combat Zone. In 1967,
when Americans in Vietnam were increasingly being targeted by enemy soldiers, an American surgeon visited a
local village to provide medical care. “I was shown a young
man with bilateral inguinal hernias. They weren’t very
large and probably were of the direct variety so that they
offered little risk of incarcerating. Nevertheless I recommended that they be repaired, primarily, I suppose, because it would allow me to practice an operation—a
McVay repair—that I had learned shortly before entering
the Army and had not done since. Although the operation
was usually done in stages because of considerable morbidity, I would do both sides simultaneously because it
was dangerous driving from the base camp to the village
and I did not know when I might be able to return to do
the remaining side if I didn’t do it now. The bilateral repairs were duly performed with much [praise]…from the
observers. On leaving, I gave instructions that the patient should remain in bed as much as possible. UnfortuMilitary Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
819
nately, the next 3 weeks were quite busy with our own
wounded. When I was next able to visit the village, I was
distressed to see that the young man was sharing a hospital bed with two other patients, both of whom were quite ill.”
Comment: More than 30 years after this case, the surgeon remains troubled by how oblivious he was to the
structural limitations of local medical resources at that
time. His intention had been to do the best he could for
this patient. The patient sharing a bed with other ill, and
possibly infected, patients certainly increased the likelihood of postoperative infection for this procedure. In retrospect, it is clear to him that his lack of understanding of
the circumstances of this young man’s culture and the
resources available to him might have resulted in a severe infection and even death of this patient. The surgeon can now see that his American background and
perspective did not mesh well with the day-to-day life of
the typical Vietnamese patient at that time.
The areas that are of paramount importance in
missions in which armed conflict may occur include
resources, priorities for treatment, and security of
the healthcare workers and facilities. The term
“Medical Rules of Engagement (MROE)” is occasionally used to outline the restrictions placed on
when and who to treat. The analogy to the military
“Rules of Engagement” (ROE) on when and how to
respond with weapons is obvious.
Both the Rules of Engagement and Medical Rules
of Engagement may change, sometimes quickly and
unpredictably. Initially, Operation Restore Hope, in
Somalia, was a humanitarian mission, as well as a
security operation for military forces, because the
primary mission was to provide a secure environment for the delivery of humanitarian aid. After US
service members, NGO aid workers, and other UN
peacekeepers were killed by Somalis, it was redesignated as a combat mission. As the tactical situation changed, so did the medical requirements. Case
Study 25-8 illustrates the changing Medical Rules
of Engagement in Somalia. It also illustrates changing attitudes among both the healthcare professionals and the local population.
Case Study 25-8: Changing Environments in a
Medical Assistance Effort. In Somalia, during Operation Restore Hope, the United States military was initially
generous with medicines and bandages. The doctors and
other healthcare personnel had few military patients and
were eager to maintain their medical skills. It was logical
that medical services would be offered to the local population. The Navy provided MEDCAP (Medical Civic Action Program) services. The US Army’s Special Forces in
the countryside treated those Somalis that came to their
aid station. The evacuation hospital treated those civilians that US forces had injured, or whoever presented
saying that they had been wounded by Americans.
Increasing numbers of Somalis presented to the hospital, claiming they had been injured by US forces. This
was clearly the case for some of them who had been shot
because they were shooting at American troops. Others
had been shot by other Somalis. As the overall military
situation began to deteriorate, with foreigners being targeted by members of the warring clans, the situation in
the hospital deteriorated as well. Some patients stole
hospital supplies. Other Somalis began to infiltrate through
the concertina wire from the outside. More and more hospital personnel needed to act as guards, even though few
medics were experienced in standing guard. The difficulties were further exacerbated by clan structure and the
fact that clans were irritated by their perception that the
Americans were not treating their personnel but were
treating members of rival clans. The altruistic intentions
left hostile feelings on all sides.
Comment: The negative turn of events in Somalia was
beyond the control of the military medical professionals
who had been deployed to Operation Restore Hope. Indeed, a case could be made that the deployment and its
consequent difficulties had had sociopolitical factors that
had not been considered in the decision to send peacekeepers into the country. American forces had arrived with
sincere and altruistic aspirations to help a definitely needy
and starving population. Many left angry at Somalis and
at their own country for what they perceived as a “no win”
situation into which they had been thrust. In retrospect it
is apparent that the desire to help a starving population,
although exceedingly altruistic, was doomed to fail because it had not addressed the reasons for the starvation, and thus had not implemented realistic expectations
and procedures.
Few individuals or organizations dispute that the
US military is capable of providing exceptional
medical care in austere field environments. Mobile
field hospitals and hospital ships provide a level of
care on par with many hospitals in the continental
United States and Europe. However, the involvement of military forces in conflict-related contingency operations is criticized for various reasons.
Some nongovernmental organizations, such as
Médecins Sans Frontiéres ([Doctors Without Borders]
MSF), maintain that humanitarian aid must be delivered by neutral organizations that provide care
to all people on the basis of need alone.
Exhibit 25-4 lists the 10 principle commitments
that comprise the Code of Conduct from the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
and NGOs in disaster relief. The code was adopted
in 1994 by eight of the largest international disaster
response agencies, and is used by the International
Red Cross to assess its own relief efforts. Principle
4 states that “we shall endeavor not to act as instruments of government foreign policy.” Humanitarian organizations assert that militaries are instruMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
820
ments of government foreign policy and therefore
should not be involved in direct humanitarian aid. 18
They worry that the neutrality of their own organizations may become suspect if they are perceived
to be working too closely with the military. Because
the NGOs are not armed, they are especially vulnerable to retaliation. The killings of aid workers
in Chechnya and East Timor in the 1990s illustrate
their vulnerability.
Despite those reservations, it is likely that the
United States will continue to provide aid to civilians in contingency operations. This section, like the
previous one, attempts to outline some of the factors
involved so that decision making is the best possible.
The variables fall into the following categories:
• the tactical situation;
• the relationship of the local civilian population to US armed forces;
• patient priority;
• available resources;
• availability of other medical professionals
(local, allies, and NGOs);
• whether US forces caused the injury;
• the acute vs chronic nature of an illness or
injury; and
• the projected length of stay in a deployed
environment.
Balancing Allocation of Medical Resources
There are seldom, if ever, enough resources to
treat all persons needing medical assistance. During contingency operations, the question of resources is always central. The balance is how to
provide for one’s own forces, and also provide lifesaving care for the local population. Sometimes the
most that can be done is to unofficially provide
some of the most rudimentary basics, as the following case study describes.
Case Study 25-9: Disobeying Orders—The “Risks”
Associated With the Desire to Help. During the Korean
War there were hundreds of thousands of ill, starving,
and homeless refugees. The American military physicians
were officially told not to treat the local population, but
instead to save their medical supplies for the American
and allied troops.
At least one physician ignored the order. 19 He set up a
makeshift hospital in a warehouse. Within a month, he
had approximately 2,500 patients in the warehouse. Although he could not supply them all with medication, they
did have shelter and blankets.
Comment: This physician was able to feel that he had
made a difference in the plight of these refugees. However, had there been a need for the medical supplies he
was diverting to the local population, there would have
been serious repercussions following his decision to disobey the orders he had been given.
The United States and other sophisticated militaries deploy with advanced medical equipment,
medicine, and healthcare personnel to treat the deployed force. Medical planners normally plan for
worst-case scenarios that have fortunately rarely
occurred in recent conflicts. The resulting excess
medical capacity is then potentially available to
treat the many wounded and sick civilians who
have not been cared for.
 Military operations orders may specify that
EXHIBIT 25-4
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR THE INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS AND RED CRESCENT
MOVEMENT AND NGOS IN DISASTER RELIEF
1.
The humanitarian imperative comes first.
2.
Aid is given regardless of the race, creed, or nationality of the recipients and without adverse distinction of any kind. Aid priorities are calculated on the basis of need alone.
3.
Aid will not be used to further a particular political or religious standpoint.
4.
We shall endeavor not to act as instruments of government foreign policy.
5.
We shall respect culture and custom.
6.
We shall attempt to build disaster response on local capacities.
7.
Ways shall be found to involve programme beneficiaries in the management of relief aid.
8.
Relief aid must strive to reduce future vulnerabilities to disaster as well as meeting basic needs.
9.
We hold ourselves accountable to both those we seek to assist and those from whom we accept resources.
10.
In our information, publicity and advertising activities, we shall recognize disaster victims as dignified human beings, not hopeless objects.
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
821
medical care be reserved for United States or coalition forces only. However, the guidance may also
permit the local commander or surgeon to authorize care for other groups, including civilians, as
the situation allows. The humanitarian imperative
often dictates that US medical assets be used to provide life, limb, and eyesight saving care to civilians.
Tactical considerations will be of prime importance to the commander and his medical planner.
Obviously the ability of US medical professionals
to treat local populations varies depending on
whether the environment is friendly or hostile. In
times of calm, there is usually more flexibility than
in times of conflict. If plentiful resources are available,
US military healthcare professionals may be more
generous than if resources are scarce. Similarly if
the surgeons have no pending surgery cases, or the
infectious disease doctors have never seen a case
of dengue fever before, they may be very interested
in providing treatment. It is difficult, however, to
predict just how quickly medical situations might
arise, as the following case study demonstrates.
Case Study 25-10: Allocating Medical Resources
in a Rapidly Changing Military Environment. An American military truck convoy came upon a three-vehicle pileup (vehicles similar to the one shown in Figure 25-4), with
two dead, three seriously injured, and many others who
were slightly injured, near Bardera, in the southern portion of Somalia. The Joint Task Force (JTF) Surgeon, located in Kismayu, was asked to send two medevac
Blackhawks for assistance in transporting the victims to
Mogadishu. Because the military situation in Kismayu was
relatively quiet that morning, he dispatched two choppers,
with pilots and medics. He then went to visit a local NGO.
When the JTF surgeon returned to his headquarters,
he learned from the hospital in Mogadishu that the three
seriously injured traffic accident victims had died during
the flight. Furthermore, his superior was irate that the
helicopters were used on a civilian mission as there had
been heavy fighting in Bardera that day and the commander of the medevac battalion had had to scramble to
find enough assets to pick up the wounded Marines.
Comment: In the beginning days of a deployment, supplies may be abundant. If a mass casualty situation occurs, and blood is short for American service members,
there may be legitimate criticism about “wasting” that
blood. In the above example, no American lives were lost
on the mission—but they could have been. All helicopter
missions have some element of danger. If helicopters and
crews are dispatched to pick up the victim of a traffic accident, and one of those helicopters crashes, that crew
and that helicopter will not be available for their primary
function. Similarly if the hospital beds are all full with local civilians, and an emergency situation develops requiring those beds for US troops, there will be a dilemma.
The primary mission for the medical professionals is to
support the US military mission. There is also an implied
promise of providing the necessary care (even if long-term)
to these civilian patients once they enter the facility.
Large medical facilities, especially if land-based,
require considerable resources themselves—to
move into place, provide water and electricity, dispose of the waste, and to guard. Deployment of
hospital ships might be interpreted to mean that
either large numbers of American casualties are
expected or that there is a plan to treat the local
population. A heavy deployment of medical assets
may also lead to “mission creep,” which refers to a
broadening of the mission, in part because support
assets are in place. Although these are usually tactical considerations, these decisions may have ethical implications as well. For example, expectations
may be raised about more extensive treatment of
the local populations and then not fulfilled. Thus
local infrastructure may be hampered in its development. The large facility required may use scarce
Fig. 25-4. “A truckload of Somali men from the village of
Maleel arrive at the field used as a landing zone by US
Marine helicopters delivering sacks of wheat donated by
the people of Australia. 23 January 1993.” Caption and
photo: The DoD Joint Combat Camera Center, American
Forces Information Services, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs). US Forces in Somalia, Image #251.
Combat Camera photo by PHCM Terry C. Mitchell, US
Navy. In developing countries like Somalia, the shortage of transportation assets results in aging vehicles that
are often overloaded with passengers. When these vehicles are involved in accidents, the numbers of injured
and dead may be considerable.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
822
water or occupy the best land. Hospital personnel
may need to spend shifts guarding the facility rather
than treating patients. If the hospital has taken on
care of large numbers of the local population, the
question of what to do with them if the hospital is
ordered to redeploy becomes problematic.
Establishing Mission Priorities and Their
Implementation
Medical planners must decide what type of medical assets to deploy. The mix of healthcare professionals should be determined by the prospective mission
and the priorities of treatment. If only American
service members and allies will receive medical services, then the mix should concentrate on preventive
medicine physicians, surgeons, and those who concentrate on treating acute illness or injury. If the
local population will also receive medical services,
then the medical assets mix should also include
pediatricians, maternal health specialists, and specialists in chronic illness. The available time before
deployment to gather the required personnel may
also influence the mix of healthcare professionals.
A priority list needs to be developed by medical
planners before a deployment. All should realize,
however, that priorities may change depending on
the situation. The identified priorities will depend
both on readily available resources and the prevailing political realities. Some of the issues to be considered before initiating treatment in country include:
• How to categorize and prioritize patients
(by age, gender, disease, or some other category?)
• How to focus treatment plans and options
(acute treatment or chronic care?)
• How to ration limited or scarce resources
(begin or delay treatment of civilians needing these resources?)
• How to interface with local but limited
medical resources (begin or refrain from
beginning treatments that cannot be continued at local facilities?)
Seldom are the issues simple. The problem becomes more complicated, however, if the patient
under consideration is not a soldier but rather is a
criminal who has been wounded by American
forces, as the following case discusses.
Case Study 25-11: Mission Priorities and Medical
Care. A local man was observed dousing a woman with
gasoline, then setting her on fire. An American soldier,
witnessing the event, and thinking that he could stop (but
not kill) the man, shot him in the buttocks. The man was
admitted to the US military hospital because he had been
wounded by an American. However, the woman was not
eligible to be admitted to the American hospital because
her injuries were not caused by an American. She was
therefore transported to a local hospital; her outcome was
not known to the Americans.
The bullet caused extensive internal damage in the
man, requiring a series of operations and lengthy convalescent care, at a considerable expense to the US military. While hospitalized, the patient waved his genitalia
at the nurses and harassed the staff. The entire time he
was undergoing treatment, the victim’s family maintained
a watchful presence at the gate, presumably to exact revenge if he survived.
Comment: This was a very emotionally difficult episode for the hospital staff. They were not allowed to treat
locals who were dying outside the gates of the hospital,
except for those injured by US forces. Furthermore, they
believed the patient’s prior actions were abhorrent and
they were distressed at the amount of medical resources
being used to treat him. They were further distressed by
their knowledge of the general level of disease and suffering in the local population and the thought that the same
amount of medical resources used outside the gate, rather
than on this reprehensible patient, might alleviate a considerable amount of that suffering. Their intellectual understanding of the requirement to treat those that Americans
had wounded did little to lessen their anger in dealing
with this extremely difficult patient. They questioned if it
was ethical to spend over $300,000 to treat this patient
yet ignore dying children right outside the gate.
The emergent nature of an injury raises another
question. In most instances, if US military healthcare
professionals are presented with an “acute life or
limb” injury the decision is made to treat. If the local civilian patient has a chronic disease where longterm medication may be needed, such as HIV or
tuberculosis, there is little likelihood of US medical
treatment. Likewise, if after an operation a patient
will need dialysis to survive, the surgery may not
be done, unless the patient can be evacuated for
long-term care and the US government is willing
to accept that expense. In fact, even crutches and
bandages are not usually provided, let alone any
other forms of long-term convalescent care.
An exception to this determination to not provide long-term care occurs if US forces inflicted the
injury, whether in a firefight or motor vehicle accident. If the patient were injured in a hostile action,
even if not officially guided by the Geneva Convention prisoner of war rules (which cover war between sovereign nations), most would agree that
the ethical requirement is to treat. Then the patient
will need guards, to ensure no pilferage or otherMilitary Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
823
wise more serious disruption. It may be difficult for
the medical unit to have enough hospital staff to
provide guards and still be able to perform their
healthcare mission.
If the patient presents to a US military medical
facility, stating that US forces caused his accident
or injury, it may be difficult to turn that patient away
even if the healthcare professionals are absolutely
certain that the accident or injury was not caused
by US forces. The danger is that this often leads to
a long line of potential patients, claiming that US
forces caused their injuries, whether or not that was
actually the case. There are no existing guidelines
as to how to make those distinctions.
In general, those who are working for US forces,
whether doing laundry, cleaning out buildings, or
translating, will receive medical treatment. Again
an issue arises as to how far that treatment extends—to their immediate or extended family members, those who work for US allies, or say they have
worked for the United States in the past? (This is
complicated by the fact that US military medical
facilities do not have the administrative capability
to verify such an employment relationship.) We do
not have an answer to this ethical question, other
than to note that the provision of such treatment
often depends on the resources available as well as
the tactical environment.
These decisions regarding treating the local
population are further complicated by the fact that
it is difficult to predict how long US forces will remain in the theater. In the event of an early pullout, patient care will be disrupted unless patients
are taken with the medical units when they depart.
This raises questions about American obligation to
these patients. If these patients are in the midst of
treatment, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to
see to the conclusion of the treatment plan. In Somalia, after the attack that left 18 American soldiers
dead, the United States forces were ordered to rapidly withdraw. Nothing is known of the fate of any
Somali patients left behind.
Another potential area of concern is mental
health treatment. The military traditionally provides little mental health treatment to the local
population. There are usually so many barriers of
language and culture that to provide any “counseling” is very difficult. There are situations, however,
in which military healthcare professionals need to
intervene in mental health problems in a local population. Even severe mental illness, which responds
to medication, has cultural overlays. Psychotherapy
and counseling are even more culture bound. To
bring a patient out of psychosis or depression with
medication, then leave that same patient to relapse
back into illness might actually worsen the patient’s
overall psychiatric condition.
For instance, a number of Haitian migrants who
were interred in Cuba had severe mental illness. It
is generally not feasible to house patients with severe mental illness alongside medical patients. And
it is likewise not feasible to simply isolate such patients as that would require considerable additional
resources to monitor and restrain their behavior.
The migrants as a group were housed in an old
Navy brig (Figure 25-5), which had been abandoned
because it was unfit for sailors. In Cuba, US military psychiatrists treated the Haitian migrants with
severe mental illness on this “inpatient” ward with
medications. 20
A psychiatrist serving in Cuba described an additional dilemma. Migrants who had mental health
diagnoses were barred from immigration to the
United States under State Department policy. 20 Immigration authorities asked to see mental health
records to aid in making immigration decisions.
This placed him into a considerable ethical dilemma: Should he stop keeping records or should
he stop seeing patients so his patients had an opportunity to migrate? But, if he helped them circumvent United States law, would that not also be
illegal or unethical?
Many NGOs, however, do provide mental health
Fig. 25-5. US Naval Brig, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The
facility was condemned, but was used to detain migrants
with mental illness. The psychiatrist was troubled that
his treatment of the detainees could be used to restrict
them from immigration to the United States. Photograph:
Courtesy of Lieutenant Colonel Dermot Cotter, MD.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
824
counseling. There have been numerous attempts to
provide therapy to the local population in Kosovo.
Case Study 25-12: Understanding Cultural Needs
of Patients. A nongovernmental organization started a
support group for Albanian women who had been raped
by Serbs. The facilitator attempted to get the young
women to talk about the rape experience. The women
would not talk about their experiences, but were eventually willing to discuss their concerns about the lack of
water and electricity and the coming winter. One of the
women in the group had been made pregnant by her attacker. She strangled her healthy newborn baby shortly
after its birth. This shocked the counselors, but the other
group members seemed to understand.
Comment: In a Western context, rape victims can generally expect sympathy and reintegration into society even
if they became pregnant in the attack. In other countries
there is no such expectation. Indeed, in many countries
the women become outcasts after such an attack. Raising a child who was fathered in the attack would add to
their difficulties. The failure to understand the cultural
context of these women’s experience not only negated
the therapeutic effectiveness of this effort, but it also
added to their burden (by having to endure the facilitator’s
attempts to get them to talk about the unspeakable). Further, such a failure can have a “ripple effect,” impeding
the implementation of programs that are of benefit.
Local Albanian and Croatian healthcare professionals have criticized these efforts for the lack of
cultural sensitivity and unsupervised inappropriate application of Western methods to very different cultures. 21 There are currently attempts to develop guidelines on credentials and training of
NGO counselors. 22
Increasing Security in Conflict-Related
Contingency Operations
The security of medical supplies and facilities,
and thus the safety of medical personnel, can not
be guaranteed in a contingency operation. Although
US military medical personnel have been relatively
“safe” in the recent past, other nations have had
physicians killed and NGOs have had relief workers killed.
The Geneva Conventions, which govern armed
conflict between sovereign nations, seek to protect the
wounded, medical establishments, and medical personnel. The wounded and sick “shall be respected and
protected in all circumstances.”1(Art 12) “Fixed establishments and mobile medical units of the Medical service may in no circumstances be attacked, but shall at
all times be respected and protected by the Parties to
the conflict.”1(Art 19) Medical personnel are protected,
and if captured, are not considered prisoners of war,
but detained personnel. 1(Art 24,30)
Although many countries try to maintain the
stated considerations of the Geneva Conventions
for the safety and treatment of the medical mission,
not all countries abide by these rules. This was certainly the case in World War II where there were
instances of clearly marked medical facilities being
attacked. The safety of medical areas becomes more
tenuous when the warring parties are nonsovereign
entities (ie, nonsignatories to the Geneva Conventions) and have made no commitment to refrain
from attacking such installations. In these instances,
the likelihood increases that the Red Cross or Red
Crescent emblem may be seen as a distinct target.
Furthermore, often the security threat comes not
from any armed group but rather from the local
population. It can be troubling to healthcare professionals to need to guard supplies such as bandages, medications, and even food, to keep them
from a potentially needy population. Most medical
personnel have very little training in setting up
concertina wire or guarding the perimeter. In many
instances their familiarity with weapons is limited
to going to a range for a couple of hours every few
years. Under the Geneva Conventions, they may
Fig. 25-6. One of the authors [ECR] in Somalia with the
528th Combat Stress Control Detachment. From the beginning, medical personnel were alert for the possibility
of hostile action by the various warring Somali clans.
When shots rang out, or mortar shells were heard, personnel were instructed to get down below the level of
the windows, put the ammunition clip in the chamber of
the sidearm, but not “lock and load.” The Rules of Engagement (ROEs) were continually changing. Photograph: Courtesy of Lieutenant Colonel Elspeth Cameron
Ritchie, MD.
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
825
cal staff with the task of safeguarding the supplies,
even though they have little expertise in this area.
This inexperience may contribute to a siege-like atmosphere as well as actual pilferage.
Fig. 25-7. “Division Mental Health: We Decide What’s
Normal!” This sign, hand-lettered on cardboard and attached to the wall with duct tape (especially versatile in
austere environments), announces the location of the
mental health assets of the 10th Mountain Division Mental Health in Somalia. Part of the job of mental health
was to validate and normalize the feelings of horror and
sorrow among the military personnel, “normal reactions
to abnormal situations.” Hence the ironic motto of the
10th Mountain Division Mental Health (which the 528th
adopted): “We decide what’s normal.” Photograph: Courtesy of Lieutenant Colonel Elspeth Cameron Ritchie, MD.
carry weapons for defense of their patients and
themselves (Figure 25-6). Yet in contingency operations there may be few excess police or combat arms
soldiers to secure the facilities. That leaves the medi“TAKING CARE OF” THE CAREGIVERS
It has long been recognized that there is a limit
to the terrors of war that individuals can experience before these affect them personally and psychologically. Over the years this has been given a
variety of labels, including battle fatigue and combat exhaustion. A number of programs have been
instituted to alleviate, as much as possible, this very
real after-effect of war. Whether it is done through
after-action reviews, which seek to debrief a group
that has experienced trauma, or by utilizing combat stress principles, which seek to rest, reassure,
and return soldiers to their units, the goal is the
same—to acknowledge the trauma and to provide
a way to return to function (Figure 25-7).
Military medical professionals are not exempt
from the terrors of war and the resulting psychological impact. It is true that the operations this
chapter has described often do not involve the horrific casualties that one normally associates with
combat. Nonetheless, there is still the significant
potential for medical personnel to experience psychological difficulty providing medical care in the
exceedingly dangerous environments of some of the
contingency missions, with all the frustration, impotence, and fear that accompanies these missions.
Although the US military seeks to protect the health
of the forces, there has been less attention paid to
assessing the impact of watching people die, while
powerless to save them because of a lack of resources, the danger involved, or the medical rules
of engagement. The feelings of terror are compounded if the healthcare professionals also feel
that they personally are in danger, as often may be
the case.
All of these factors—fear, impotence, danger, and
horrific mass casualties—combined to affect the
Canadian peacekeeping forces in Rwanda in 1994.
The task confronting them was of such magnitude
that they found themselves in a virtual “sea of humanity” (Figure 25-8) in which they were powerless to do much more than witness the unfolding
events. They were so outnumbered that all they
could do was watch and “witness the evil” as thousands of people were attacked with machetes. 23
Several years later one of their generals confirmed that he had developed posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) with suicidal ideation.
Dallaire, who commanded the UN mission in
wartown (sic) Rwanda in 1994, took early retirement last April on medical advice, citing stress and
nightmares due to Rwanda’s civil war horrors. He
has publicly acknowledged his battle with posttraumatic stress. He admitted recently he tried at
least twice to take his own life since he commanded
the mission, during which his troops were unable
to prevent the massacre of approximately 800,000
Hutus and Tutsis. 24
Dallaire was quoted by the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation Radio as having said, in a written statement sent to the National Post [a Canadian daily], that
[t]here are times when the best medication and
therapist simply can’t help a soldier suffering from
this new generation of peacekeeping injury. The
anger, the rage, the hurt and the cold loneliness that
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
826
separate you from your family, friends and society’s
normal daily routine are so powerful that the option
of destroying yourself is both real and attractive. 25
Historically the US military has focused training
on preparation for actual combat, but recently
preparation for other operations, to include disaster relief and contingency, has been augmented to
include physical and emotional aspects. It is this
latter category, the emotional aspects of deployment
to a peacetime engagement project or a contingency
operation, that is increasingly becoming important
to military medical professionals. The principles of
battlefield psychiatry are applicable here, but these
principles need expansion and modification for contingency operations. The basic principles of battlefield treatment for combat stress or battle fatigue
casualties are: (a) prevention, (b) early intervention
with those who may be affected, and (c) immediate
treatment with members who have signs and symptoms. Classically this has been codified in mnemonics such as PIES: proximity, immediacy, expectancy,
and simplicity. (Jones has discussed these principles
in detail in two volumes, Military Psychiatry26 and
War Psychiatry,27 in this textbook series.)
Modifying these principles of battle psychiatry
for use with contingency operations is still in development. However, once again the important
principles are preparation, early intervention, and
simple treatment. Preparation includes instructing
medical professionals in basic soldiering skills, to
ensure that they are comfortable with their weapons, and know how to guard or otherwise secure
themselves and the medical treatment facilities.
They need to be given as much information as possible about the potential situation before they deploy. If they will be treating rape and torture victims, or exposed to the sight and smells of mass
graves, this should be discussed in advance, as a
form of “stress inoculation.” The importance of the
mission should be explained so they can clearly
understand their role in its success. Vertical (up and
down the chain of command) and horizontal (between peers) communication must continue constantly, so that they are not left to guess (or to spread
rumors) about the purpose, security, and length of
the mission. The Medical Rules of Engagement likewise should be discussed, as well as the rationale
behind them.
It is especially important that they be given the
opportunity to freely discuss any serious incidents
(before, during, and after), especially if they are in
Fig. 25-8. A Canadian peacekeeper in Rwanda, passing out
information (a), tending to a sick child in the street (b), and
visiting a makeshift infirmary for children (c). These three
photographs demonstrate the magnitude of the task facing
the Canadian forces in Rwanda. Surrounded by people in
need of the most basic of services, and unable to adequately
meet those needs, the peacekeepers found themselves unable to accomplish the mission they had set out to do. These
photographs do not, however, illustrate the horror of what
the Canadians saw as they bore witness to the slaughter
around them, outnumbered and unable to stop it. However, through their efforts with the media, they were able
to bring the attention of the world to the events in Rwanda.
Photographs: Courtesy of the Canadian Forces.
a
b
c
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
827
a particularly distressing situation, such as the
death of a teammate or a child. Such early intervention strategies are especially important if they
have witnessed mass carnage. This latter case is an
instance that these authors believe should mandate
the opportunity for all personnel to discuss what
they have experienced. Medical personnel who
have been deployed on these missions will also
need preparation for reentering “normal” society,
which may not understand or care about what they
have been through. This reentry preparation may
be done by chaplains or mental health workers, but
ideally should be initiated by their leaders.
The US military tries to prepare service members
for the sights, smells, and sounds of mass carnage,
and, with after-action reviews, tries to ameliorate
the impact of those sensory experiences. Nonetheless, there truly is no adequate preparation for the
sights, smells, and sounds of mass death. Indeed,
many who have had the experience of seeing the
unthinkable are forever changed by the event. Furthermore, they are often unable to even adequately
describe the impact of the experience to those who
were not there. It is encouraging, however, that relief agencies are also learning of the potential longterm devastating effects to the caregivers. For instance, some of the NGO organizations are now trying to prepare their workers for the experience of
being taken hostage or tortured,28 which is similar
in concept to the military’s survival training. If
preparation for the distressing aspects of the mission is not adequate (there are missions for which
Fig. 25-9. Photo of signpost pointing the way home (a). It is not uncommon for troops to erect signposts such as this
one. The posts provide an ironic outlet for feelings of being far from home, and in places that feel distinctly alien.
Photo of a stretcher (b) with a “patient” made of camel bones, and other bones arrayed around the stretcher with the
motto of a medevac company: “ANYONE, ANYTIME, ANYWHERE.” This motto was challenged by the dangerous
environment and the shifting priorities for treatment. Despite the humorous nature of this improvised display, there
is some reality to the “veterinary medicine” aspect of the display—livestock are sometimes brought to the medical
personnel as patients. For some indigenous populations, healthy livestock means healthy people. Photographs: Courtesy of Lieutenant Colonel Elspeth Cameron Ritchie, MD.
a
b
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
828
there can be no adequate preparation), and early
intervention does not lessen the reaction to the degree necessary for a return to function, then these
various organizations have a moral obligation to
take care of the caregivers by providing them with
effective treatment for their understandable reactions to these experiences.
It is widely anticipated that for the foreseeable
future the US military will continue to provide humanitarian medical assistance in the form of peacetime engagement projects, disaster relief operations,
or conflict-related contingency operations in various locations around the world. Medical planners,
physicians, and other healthcare professionals need
to anticipate the opportunities and difficulties of undertaking these missions in dangerous and austere environments. This planning needs to focus not just on
the logistics of the operation, but also on the personnel aspects as they impact their own forces. Sometimes
these missions come at a moment’s notice, in which
case the military medical professionals are airlifted
from the comfort of their day-to-day routines into the
midst of circumstances that are simply unimaginable
for most Americans. In these circumstances, personnel need to have a sense of mission, duty, and home.
Helping them maintain those contacts with what they
have left behind, whether through mail, voice links,
or humor (Figure 25-9) will better enable them to cope
with the sometimes alien landscapes in which they
find themselves.
CONCLUSION
We have outlined the legislative background, the
different types of contingency operations, and questions of resources, priorities, and security to allow
medical personnel in the future to have a better
sense of what these missions entail. We have also
highlighted the pitfalls—poor communications,
unrealistic expectations on both sides, inadequate
understanding of the local cultures, and not integrating with local resources—in an attempt to avoid
them. We have emphasized the qualities of successful operations, which as well as avoiding the pitfalls, include sustainability and a focus on public
health measures. American military medical forces
should leave these places and peoples better than
when they came. Otherwise, how can Americans
ethically justify these interventions?
Unfortunately, this chapter cannot prepare medical planners or healthcare professionals for all engagements. Contingency operations, especially, always vary in mission, resources, training, logistics,
and security concerns. However, too often military
healthcare professionals only grapple with these
dilemmas when they are literally on the sandy or
muddy ground, trying to decide whether to send a
helicopter to a traffic accident or whether to treat a
wounded man on the doorstep of the hospital. Better training needs to be provided to military healthcare professionals to anticipate the ethical, tactical,
and logistical issues of treating a local population
in a dangerous or austere environment.
Many of the pitfalls that have been discussed in
this chapter can be avoided in the future if policy
makers and the planners of these missions examine how and why these problems occur, and initiate
remedies. The healthcare professionals who are sent
on these most difficult of missions deserve the best
support, both logistical and personal, that can be
provided to them.
This chapter has emphasized the value of understanding limitations and planning for the unexpected. Even so, neither the danger nor the austere
conditions may be sufficiently anticipated when
planning a humanitarian medical mission. The experience of the Americans in Somalia and Haiti or
the Canadians in Rwanda, who were forced to become passive observers of mass genocide, highlights the perils of any mission, but particularly a
problematic mission with inadequate protection.
REFERENCES
1.
International Committee of the Red Cross, The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. Geneva 1949.
2.
International Committee of the Red Cross, Protocols Additional to The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949.
Geneva 1977.
3.
Wittich AC. The medical care system and medical readiness training exercises (MEDRETEs) in Honduras. Mil
Med. 1989;154(1):19–23.
4.
Weisser RJ Jr. The maturing of MEDRETEs. Mil Med. 1993;158(8):573–575.
Military Humanitarian Assistance: The Pitfalls and Promise of Good Intentions
829
5.
Silverman MA, Barnes D, Zlamal R, et al. Medical readiness training exercise in El Salvador, Central America,
1996. Mil Med. 1998;163(8):519–523.
6.
Aller LF. MEDRETEs [letter comment]. Mil Med. 1994;159(1):A4.
7.
Zaijtchuk R. MEDRETEs [letter comment]. Mil Med. 1994;159(1):A4.
8.
Médecins Sans Frontières. Lecture given in Switzerland 5 September 2000 by an official representative of Médecins
Sans Frontières at the International Course on Law of Armed Conflict.
9.
Spring B, Spencer J, Anderson JH. Issues 2000: The Candidate’s Briefing Book. #14, National Defense, Restoring
US Military Strength. Washington, DC: The Heritage Foundation; 1993. Available at: http://www.heritage.org/
issues/chap14.html. Accessed 29 November 2001.
10.
Conetta P. Toward a smaller, more efficient, and more relevant US military. Project on Defense Alternatives. Cambridge, Mass: The Commonwealth Institute; October 2000. Available at: http://www.comw.org/pda/
0010bm17.html. Accessed 29 November 2001.
11.
Waller SG, Ward JB. The HCA battle-lab [letter comment]. Mil Med. 1999;164(7):V.
12.
Truman Sharpe, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences. From a talk given by T. Sharpe, 2000.
13.
Lieutenant Colonel Maureen Fensome [a Canadian physician who served in Rwanda]. Personal Communication, 2001.
14.
Hood CH. Humanitarian civic action in Honduras, 1988. Mil Med. 1991;156(6):292–296.
15.
Luz GA, De Paw JW, Gaydos JC, Hooper RR, Legters LJ. The role of military medicine in military civic action.
Mil Med. 1993;158(6):362–366.
16.
Dreher RJ, Radoiu M. Eyeglass MEDRETE: Practical considerations (a user’s guide). Mil Med. 1996;161(6):334–
338.
17.
Roundtable discussion, Pan American Health Organization Conference on Hurricane Mitch Response, Dominican Republic, 1999.
18.
The partiality of humanitarian assistance: Kosovo in comparative perspective. Toby Porter, December 1999.
Available at: http://www.jha.ac/articles/a057.htm. Accessed 29 November 2001.
19.
Information provided by Dr. John Greenwood, Historian, Office of the Surgeon General, US Army.
20.
Dermot Cotter [Army psychiatrist who served in Cuba]. Personal Communication, 2001.
21.
Remarks by speakers at the International Society for the Study of Traumatic Stress, ISTSS Conference, December 2000, San Antonio, Texas.
22.
Friedman MJ, Warfe PG, Mwiti GK. Mission-related stressors and their consequences among UN peacekeepers
and civilian field personnel. In: Green B, Friedman M, deJong J, et al, eds. Trauma in War and Peace: Prevention,
Practice, and Policy. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers; In press.
23.
Interview of General Romeo Dallaire by Michael Enright on CBC News Radio, 11 June 2000.
24.
Dallaire speaks publicly after being found unconscious in park. CP Wire. 4 July 2000 (Reference 00070401).
25.
Romeo Dallaire writes. National Post. 4 July 2000:A16.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
830
26.
Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, eds. Military Psychiatry: Preparing in Peace for War. In: Textbook
of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden
Institute; 1994.
27.
Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes JW, eds. War Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1995.
