Societal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
719
Chapter 22
SOCIETAL INFLUENCES AND THE
ETHICS OF MILITARY HEALTHCARE
JAY STANLEY, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
GENERAL WELL-BEING AND VOLUNTARY RESOCIALIZATION
Conceptualization of Well-Being
Perspective on Resocialization
Resocialization and Military Medicine
OVERVIEW OF SOCIETAL INFLUENCES
GENDER CONSIDERATIONS
Women in the Armed Forces
Military Care Issues Related to Military Spouses and Children
SEXUAL PREFERENCE
The Impact of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Military Policy Regarding Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
VETERANS’ HEALTHCARE ISSUES AND THE POLITICS OF ELIGIBILITY
CONCLUSION
*Formerly, Consultant to the Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses; Professor Emeritus of Sociology and Director,
Symposium for Peace, War and Military Studies, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Towson University, Towson, Maryland 21204-7097
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
720
J.O. Chapin
The Doctor
1944
The fourth of seven images from the series The Seven Ages of a Physician. The image portrays people in varying conditions, from the healthy newborn to the elderly woman. Within the military community there is a strong sense that
military medicine will care for service members and their families from the cradle to the grave in exchange for the
sacrifices that military life entails.
Art: Courtesy of Novartis Pharmaceuticals.
Societal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
721
INTRODUCTION
by two additional concerns. First is a growing recognition of the viability of the multidimensional
conceptualization (physical, mental, and social) of
well-being as argued by the World Health Organization. 1,2 By this is meant all aspects of the patient, not
only as these aspects affect the results of the medical
care, but, just as important, as the medical care affects
the total patient. Second is a recognition of the importance of successful voluntary resocialization of
healthcare personnel, as well as the consumers.
Resocialization should be understood as a social-psychological process that functions to quickly transform
the basic values, beliefs, motivations, and self-image
of individuals. Examination of change within military
healthcare in light of societal influences such as gender, those related to sexual preference, veterans’ issues, and politics, will be under the umbrella of these
dual perspectives of general well-being and voluntary resocialization. Thus, it is not enough for the military healthcare system to simply adjust its services to
meet the physical needs of this expanding pool of
patients. It must also adjust to meet the expanding
views of this population of patients as they reflect the
overall society from which they come.
Military healthcare within the American armed
forces is confronted by many challenges as it responds to the changing cultural environment of its
host society, and a force that is currently composed
of volunteers. As the demographics of the military
force have changed in recent decades (more married personnel with families), the practice of military medicine, that is, battle-related care, has moved
toward the practice of medicine in the military—
care of military personnel and their family members. Further, in the aftermath of the large military
mobilizations for World War II, Korea, Vietnam, and
the Persian Gulf, veterans have increasingly been a
part of the military healthcare system. These are
obviously two quite different orientations. A significant component of this changing landscape has
been an increasing division of moral-ethical considerations reflected within the larger American society. The questions are twofold: What ought or should
military healthcare be? For whom should it so be?
The pragmatic question that evolves, then, is for what
and for whom is military medicine responsible?
The response of military healthcare to societal
influences has been, and will continue to be, shaped
GENERAL WELL-BEING AND VOLUNTARY RESOCIALIZATION
The concept of overall well-being presents a challenge to medicine in general, but especially to military medicine, as the latter is indeed medicine within
the context of the military. Voluntary resocialization
is, likewise, an influence on the ethics of military
healthcare. What, then, is well-being and what is its
relationship to voluntary resocialization?
Conceptualization of Well-Being
An emerging conceptualization of health status
recognizes that it is a multidimensional phenomenon. In past decades a patient was often viewed
as a human biological entity presenting with a specific complaint that a physician would address (ie,
“the gallbladder in Room 110”; Chapter 3, Clinical
Ethics: The Art of Medicine, discusses this in greater
detail). The World Health Organization (WHO) addressed the goal of achieving a state of complete
physical, mental, and social well-being for each individual. Its conception of health recognizes the
complexity of all individuals, which is what medicine men and witch doctors of preliterate communities did when they treated the “whole man” for
presented symptoms. How can one reconcile this
multidimensional approach to healthcare with the
mission of the military in general and military medicine in particular?
The answer is that it is recognized that the primary objective of the armed forces is to maintain a
state of operational readiness. Although the variables that contribute to such a state are numerous,
it is doubtful that any are of greater importance than
the physical well-being of military personnel. Social
well-being variables such as family stability, role
integration, and active participation with healthcare
providers are likely to be important contributors to
the efficiency of a system that is primarily focused
on this physical well-being. A multidimensional
approach, although at first glance seeming to be an
additional tasking for the military, actually contributes to the military mission by increasing the wellbeing of soldiers, their families, and veterans. It is
a combat multiplier.
Identification and quantification of relevant dimensions, however, can be difficult. Although dimensions of health such as mortality and life expectancy are clearly of high importance, and easily
can be assessed quantitatively, many other salient
dimensions, particularly those germane to social
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
722
well-being, are more qualitative in nature. Nonetheless, through a mixture of quantitative and qualitative interests, a more eclectic perspective of health
appears to have grown in importance to contemporary healthcare consumers—including those eligible for military healthcare. This already complex
issue is exacerbated by a continual expansion of the
concept of social well-being that has necessitated a
broadening of the scope of military medicine. Furthermore, because of constant personnel turnover,
the evolution of any concept, including well-being,
can be more rapid than it would be in a group that
was relatively stable in terms of membership. It thus
becomes necessary for the military to constantly
resocialize its new members and, at the same time,
be altered itself. Before examining this latter dynamic, it is important to first explore voluntary
resocialization as it is experienced by the new member of the military.
Perspective on Resocialization
In response to the primary goal of maintaining
operational readiness, a major issue for the military
relates to the transformation of a civilian mentality, formed on the basis of internalization of larger
societal norms, into a military mentality—that is,
to mold someone who can be counted on in combat, who will crawl through mud, remain for long
periods in ice and snow, survive in desert conditions, who will kill when necessary, and who will
give up his life if required. How is this transformation achieved?
The answer is resocialization. This phenomenon
contrasts with continuous socialization, which is a
slow, gradual process that incorporates into an existent base new material that is reasonably consistent with that which has been learned in the past.
In comparison, resocialization represents a transformation process that is intense, occurs more rapidly, and is designed to change the basic values,
beliefs, motivations, and self-image of persons.
Even with the recent emphasis on downsizing,
approximately 150,000 persons enter the military
each year. These new recruits have experienced at
least 18 years of continuous civilian socialization.
They come into the military with an identity molded
by arrangements in the outside world. In order to
generate operationally prepared military personnel,
new members are stripped of the support that has
been provided by these arrangements. Any number of techniques are utilized to accomplish this
goal. Barriers are established to isolate the person
from the outside world. This is accomplished by
limiting visitation, free time, and time away from
the military installation. Claims to past statuses
(education, occupation, income, social position) are
denied. Trainees are instead responded to in terms
of their military status. An important component
of this transformation is a replacement of one’s
“identity kit.” Those things that people employ to
control how they appear to others—hairstyles, cosmetics, jewelry, clothes, cars—are taken away and
replaced by a standard issue or “look,” which is
uniform in character and uniformly distributed.
From the standpoint of the military, institutional
identification fosters organizational commitment;
internalization of institutional values influences
performance. Internalization will develop intrinsic
motivation so that individuals will follow orders if
they identify with the institutional values, norms,
and goals. The experience of going through “hard
times” together (ie, basic training, military academies, or officer candidate school) will promote
group identification, commitment, and cohesion.
All of these traits are important for military effectiveness. Indeed, it is argued that the stress experienced in training will help prepare the new member for stress that might be experienced later on the
battlefield.
Given the severity of traditional training methods and environments, the military eased many of
the more demanding parameters, especially those
in basic training, with the advent of the All Volunteer Force (AVF) in 1973. This decision was based
on the perception that insufficient numbers would
volunteer to undergo the traditional rigors of training. However, widespread dissatisfaction with an
absence of challenge was registered by recruits, drill
instructors, and other training personnel. Consequently, disappointment with lesser expectations
resulted in a return to more traditional training
methods and procedures.
Since the advent of the AVF, the recruitment and
resocialization processes of the military have undergone change, which has been identified by
Moskos in his discussion of the institutional/occupational thesis. 3 According to Moskos, on the organizational (macro) level, the military is experiencing a change from an institution to an occupation.
On the individual (micro) level, the military is becoming a job in the workplace. This contrasts
strongly to the military as a “calling,” in the classical Weberian sense, that the traditional military was
perceived to share with the clergy and educators.
The shift from an institution to workplace inSocietal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
723
volves a shift from concern with collective well-being to assumptions about self-interest. Accordingly,
military recruiters now emphasize financial and jobrelated aspects. The United States has traveled a
long distance from the traditional “Uncle Sam
Wants You,” to the slogan of the 1990s—“It’s a Good
Place to Begin,” or the more current “I Am an Army
of One.” Moskos views this change as a linear development. Interestingly, Segal argues that this is
more similar to a wave, or curvilinear, pattern. That
is, at any given time, and dependent on world conditions, if the military must enter into combat, a
return to an institutional format will be observed. 4(p72)
When the going gets tough, the tough get “gung
ho,” and the job gets transformed into a calling.
Regardless of which perspective one embraces, and
even with a focus on marketplace considerations,
the military is, and will remain, at least subtly, different from the civilian society. The organizational
view remains vertical as opposed to horizontal, that
is, military people see themselves as having something in common with those above and below them
hierarchically and in different jobs while civilians
are more likely to view people who have the same
job, even if in another organization, as their primary
reference group. Role commitment in the military,
then, is much more diffuse. Military personnel perform a much wider range of tasks, including things
that are not part of the “job.”
Furthermore, integration of the family and the
military is more intense than that of the family in
civilian occupations. The family is seen as an adjunct to the military system, with institutional demands extended to family members. However, an
increasing number of civilian spouses do not believe the military has, or should have, the right to
expose them to demands. This civilian-military
competition has generated the “greedy institution”
conflict argument advanced by Coser,5(pp89–100)
whereby the military and civilian family members
compete for the time and energy of the service member. Accordingly, the resocialization efforts of the
military cannot be directed exclusively toward the
military members, as they are also part of a family
unit.
Resocialization and Military Medicine
Ethically the parameters of healthcare concerns,
as they apply to the military, must embrace all of
these issues as components of medicine in the military, and must be cognizant of the specific demands
of military medicine as they relate to operational
readiness. Although it is generally assumed that
military healthcare personnel can make the transition smoothly from the practice of general medicine in the military to the practice of military medicine, most cannot. Indeed, Llewellyn has noted that,
“the practice of medicine and surgery in peacetime
prepares physicians for war as well as civilian police
department duty would prepare infantry for combat, or as well as commercial aviation experience prepares pilots for close air support in wartime.”6(p192)
The point is further emphasized by Smith, who has
posited that recognition of the theoretical and
practical differences of military medicine and practicing medicine in the military will have dramatic
effects on combat preparedness for military healthcare personnel. 7
The ability to make this transition will depend
on the success of resocialization efforts for those
who will be called upon to practice military medicine. Complicating the transition is the fact that
adaptation to military medicine environments is
becoming more demanding as the technological
development of weapons continues on a more sophisticated path. Practitioners of military medicine
must be familiar with any number of potential dangers that are generally not present in the larger society. Among these are the increased lethality and
accuracy of modern weapons, including precision
guided-missile threats; major threats of tissue damage through burns, blasts, and crush injuries; and
the practice of preventive medicine to reduce the
impact of environmental stresses, diseases, and accidental injuries. 7
It should be further noted that the threat of increased missile usage, nuclear or otherwise, has
served to democratize the risk factor of modern
warfare. The idea of “democratization of risk” was
initially introduced by Lasswell in 1937 as a component of his garrison state construct. His concern
was generated by the weapon delivery capacity of
the airplane. In the interim, with dramatically increased sophisticated delivery systems, in conjunction with the large areas that would be affected by
the destructive power of modern weaponry, “democratization of risk,” in effect has expanded to
place everyone at risk. 8
It may well be that military healthcare personnel will have to be more widely dispersed in order
to treat those injured over a much wider area. Given
this scenario, it is virtually inevitable that the primary mission of military medicine would be compromised, and would give rise to some questions
of ethical consideration.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
724
OVERVIEW OF SOCIETAL INFLUENCES
passed from generation to generation by word of
mouth, mentor to student, and in the classroom.
That practice has been supplanted with more “formalized” concern.
Ethical concern is not limited to researchers and
practitioners. Governmental policy, as it effects eligibility for receipt of care, is also of significant interest. That policy has changed substantially over
the past several decades in response to events
within the overall society. During the 1960s, for instance, America witnessed a number of radical
movements, with subsequent social change. The
civil rights movement, beginning with the 1954
Brown v Board of Education desegregation decision,
grew at the same time that emerging feminism reflected a substantive ideological shift in appropriate-inappropriate social roles for men and women,
and the antiwar movement, in protest of America’s
involvement in Vietnam, forced many citizens to
reevaluate the right and proper role of the government and the military in political policies. The occasion of these historical benchmarks signaled cultural changes that were inevitably to find expression in altered sociodemographic profiles within the
US armed forces.
Significantly, gender, racial and ethnic identities
have been differentially represented following the
advent of the AVF. That is, the number and proportion of minorities (women, African-Americans, and
Hispanic Americans) serving in the armed forces
have increased. As a part of the larger society, military policy and engagement were inevitably and
inextricably interwoven by both the civil and the
equal rights movements.
The changes that have occurred were not isolated
to active duty concerns. From the perspective of
veterans of US military service, the importance of
ethical considerations has been further underlined
by the controversies regarding the legitimacy of
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a psychiatric diagnosis, and the consequences of exposure to
Agent Orange during the Vietnam conflict. In the
face of a decade of extreme opposition, veterans of
the Vietnam War were successful in getting PTSD
included the American Psychiatric Association’s
third edition of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-III), published in 1980, as
well as the subsequent revised version (DSM-IIIR).
They also gained treatment and compensation for
health conditions associated with exposure to the
herbicide, Agent Orange. The narrative of these two
As America enters the 21st century, it is clear that
healthcare is experiencing a major transitional period. As a part of the American culture, military
medicine is similarly engaged in altering its parameters, especially in terms of access, quality of care,
and cost. Further, it is increasingly recognized that
the sense of well-being of military personnel is dramatically affected by the sense of satisfaction with
the health of each family member and the delivery
of healthcare to all family members. Additionally,
the decision whether to remain in the military will
be influenced by similar perceptions of those who
have previously served and who are eligible for
healthcare benefits. 9(p1) That is, are veterans, with
whom military personnel interact or learn about,
satisfied with the manner in which military healthcare has met their needs once they are no longer in
uniform?
The complexity is increased by two important
concerns: (1) the sociodemographic diversity of
persons currently serving and those eligible for
military healthcare benefits; and (most important
for this collection of works) (2) the ethics of military medicine. The following is a discussion regarding ethical delivery of military healthcare to this
diverse consumer base within a constantly changing environment.
Despite the focus of this volume, some may perceive a discussion of ethics as superfluous. Most
persons see themselves as being ethical people who,
when confronted by a choice, do the right thing.
Nevertheless, there is a current explosion of interest
regarding ethical considerations that is affecting a vast
array of social institutions, including that of medicine. Indeed, every medical school now has at least
one ethicist as a faculty member. Further, bibliographic citations germane to ethics have expanded
to where they can only be described as voluminous.
The growth of public interest in ethics has significantly influenced the manner in which researchers plan and conduct their research, as well as the
way in which practitioners present themselves to
consumers of their skills. Although initial concern
focused on biomedical research and the clear potential for harm to those willing to participate in
such empirical efforts, attention has expanded to
include any area of inquiry or presentation that involves human respondents. This does not mean that
researchers or practitioners were previously without ethics or concern for human respondents or
consumers, but such concern had traditionally been
Societal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
725
struggles is offered through Scott’s examination of
the politics of readjustment of Vietnam veterans. 10
He describes the inevitable imbalance between the
indebtedness a nation has to its warriors and the
postwar unwillingness to provide adequate gratitude and retribution. Such issues provide strong
support for the importance of the ethics of policy
formation and implementation. Although Scott has
chronicled some dramatic victories for the Vietnam
veteran, recovery has been less than total.
The ethical considerations of political policy for
the Vietnam veteran may be mirrored by similar
considerations for Persian Gulf veterans whose illnesses, including fatigue, rashes, and tumors, have
stymied researchers. Reaction to the so-called “Gulf
War syndrome” has been more complicated as a
number of expert panels have failed to locate evidence of a new or unique Gulf-War–related disease.
Nevertheless, there does seem to be a medical consensus that the variety of symptoms presented by
Persian Gulf War veterans may be connected to their
service within that environment.
In contrast to the political battle that raged over
PTSD, Congress quickly responded to the presentation of Gulf War illnesses by providing temporary
disability benefits, funding for additional research,
and allocating funds for marriage and family counseling. This recognition of the legitimacy of presented symptoms, which are possibly reflective of
exposure to health-threatening stimuli while in the
service of the United States, suggests a more appropriate ethical posture.
Additionally, the Veteran’s Administration has
responded favorably by making available a complete physical examination to all Persian Gulf veterans; a 24-hours-per-day information center; a designated physician at every VA medical center to
accommodate examinations, receive updated information and educational materials, and to provide
follow-up care; and Persian Gulf Referral Centers. 11
More than 100,000 of the approximately 697,000
men and women who served in the Persian Gulf
War (1990–1991) have reported symptoms. This
number may expand in the future.
Despite the early congressional response, the
Department of Defense (DoD) was cautious in its
response to these reports of exposure to various
agents. Ultimately, President Clinton, in an unusual
move, appointed an oversight board to assist the
direction of the DoD investigation. 12 An initially
emphasized hypothesis of the cause of the Gulf War
symptoms was stress. Additional inquiry has resulted in the acknowledgment that these symptoms
may evolve from any number of environmental substances including the above noted depleted uranium, pesticides, battlefield drugs, and even nerve
gas. Unfortunately, the absence of baseline data on
the health of military personnel, and the lack of reliable exposure data renders it difficult to be specific in the identification of the cause(s) of the
symptoms. 13(p1) The cause(s) of Gulf War illnesses,
however, as well as the treatment of such, continue
to be influenced by an inextricable entanglement
of political, medical, and social pressures.
In essence, it is here argued that there is a growing recognition that military healthcare must be
responsive to the changing environments of the civilian society that it serves. Although it is widely
acknowledged that the military engages in dramatic
resocialization efforts in order to satisfactorily train
personnel for operational readiness, social changes
may dictate modification of those resocialization
efforts, including the breakdown of artificial barriers and facilitation of interactive cooperation, in terms
of the delivery and receipt of military healthcare
for persons of different subcultural backgrounds.
The dual perspectives of general well-being and
resocialization have not been traditionally included
under the healthcare umbrella. They are addressed
here, however, in recognition of the appropriateness
of the World Health Organization’s objective of
health and social well-being. Further, exclusion of
specific social variables such as racial-ethnic health
considerations, family health, and health issues
unique to women and homosexuals may have been
due to a belief that these concerns were of a temporary nature. It is not likely that these issues will
“fade away.” Assuming for a moment, however, that
these social concerns are all passing societal fads, a
great deal of transferable insight might be gained
by the study of any social pathology. The parallels
that are currently being drawn between the integration of African-Americans and women as minority
components of the military offer but one example.
GENDER CONSIDERATIONS
A discussion of military healthcare delivery to
women must include a number of population segments. Principal among these are the women who
serve as members of the military, and those who
are civilian spouses (also often referred to as “military wives”) of military personnel. Although civilMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
726
ian men may be spouses of military personnel, the
overwhelming majority of civilian spouses are female. Beyond personal health issues, these military
wives are concerned with family health issues, and
these will be addressed in this section as well.
Women in the Armed Forces
Historically, one of the central concerns regarding women’s utilization in the military has been the
effect of service on their health. Similarly, concern
has been expressed regarding the effect of women’s
health status on operational readiness. 14(p75) During
World War II, for instance, gynecological and obstetrical issues were the most frequently cited concerns regarding women’s participation in the armed
forces. 15 Although women did have 36% more sick
calls than men, 70% more colds, and twice the rate
of dysentery, pregnancy rates were so low that a
special pregnancy policy was not enacted. 15 Indeed,
the higher sick call rates for women were viewed
positively as they were perceived by the Surgeon
General’s Office as preventive medicine. In contrast,
men were much more likely, for example, to seek
medical treatment for pneumonia, rheumatic fever,
and other conditions that called for longer hospital
stays15 and therefore functioned as a greater interference to the maintenance of operational readiness.
There has been a very large increase in the proportion of the armed services composed of women
since the advent of the AVF in 1973. When America’s
armed forces began to draw their personnel from
volunteers, women made up less than 2% of America’s military manpower. The female proportion today is closer to 14%, although the percentage of
women within the individual branches differs significantly. The US Air Force is the most receptive, with
approximately 18% of its members being female,
while the US Marine Corps is the least so, with only
5% of its membership composed of women. 16 These
differences likely reflect the differing missions of
the services, the former being more technological,
while the latter is more directly involved in combat. Definition of appropriate roles for women to
enact within the military also has undergone significant expansion. Women are now included within
the complement of combatants, although the individual branches of the service have expanded their
numbers and opportunities differentially.
In response to the changing roles of women in
the military, the Department of Defense appointed
a task force in the late 1980s to study relevant issues. One of these concerns was the adequacy of
medical care for women’s health needs. 17(p32) As before, the focus was on the effect of service on
women’s health, and the effect of women’s health
on operational readiness. Health issues that women
have in common with men were also addressed. For
example, although significantly greater for men,
women also compromise readiness through illicit
drug usage, smoking, and their consumption of alcohol. Heavy drinking and being able to “hold one’s
liquor” have traditionally been assessments “of
suitability of the demanding masculine military
role.”18(p133) Resocialization efforts are reflected in
DoD policy that is oriented toward preventing and
minimizing pejorative effects of heavy alcohol,
drug, and tobacco use on military performance, and
to encourage behavior that would contribute to
optimum health and fitness.
In a methodologically sophisticated comparison
of data gathered from five worldwide surveys of
military personnel, Bray and colleagues19 determined
that the overall use of these substances among military personnel has declined due to effective preventive substance use programs, the promotion of
health programs, reduced rates of smoking and illicit drug usage within the civilian population from
which military personnel are recruited, and an overall improvement of quality of recruits. Because some
female and male recruits continue to use these substances the proposition that missed duty time can
and will result from these poor health habits can be
reasonably advanced.
On another dimension, it is clear that each environment in which persons are located presents a
different set of physical and chemical agents that
may serve as health risks. Although this is obviously
true for male and female personnel, the expanding
military occupational opportunities for women
members of the military offer additional concern.
For instance, according to Kanter,20 women may
experience stress because of their minority status
within a predominantly male institution. (He also
notes that women would be expected to experience
greater stress until their numbers exceed 15%–20%
of the total.) Although the frequency of sexual harassment is not currently quantifiable, it is nonetheless a stressful experience for most women.
Hoiberg and White14 posited that these environmental, occupational, and social-psychological factors might well contribute to an increased risk of ill
health among female military personnel. In the
early years of the AVF, as the number of women,
and their proportion of the total force, began to increase, their hospitalization rates for virtually all
diagnostic categories, as well as for psychosocial
stress related disorders such as transient situational
Societal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
727
disturbances, neuroses, personality disorders, and
gastrointestinal problems, were higher than those
reported for men. 14(p75) However, in a 15-year longitudinal study of the health status of enlisted women
in the US Navy, and a comparison with women
members of other branches of the service, Hoiberg
and White concluded that the overall health levels
of female military personnel had not worsened, but
actually improved. 14(pp89–90) This is likely to reflect a
time of growing numbers and expanded occupational opportunities. Increases and decreases in
hospitalization rates, dependent on diagnostic categories, were seen during this 15-year period, as
were variant rates across cohort groups. One important category that reflected an increase in hospitalization rates was that of pregnancy. Indeed, this
category accounted for one-third of the admissions
during this 15-year period. (It should be noted that
the overwhelming majority of women in the military are within the fecund age range as defined by
the Bureau of the Census, ie, 15–44.)
This rather dramatic observation provides an
opportunity to examine a military healthcare policy
from practical and ethical perspectives. Traditionally,
female military personnel who became pregnant
were automatically discharged. Pragmatically this
policy might have reduced immediate healthcare
costs. However, long-term financial expenditures
were probably increased because of it. Among other
cost considerations, such as uniforms and equipment, recruitment and training expenses related to
replacement efforts most certainly exceeded the
price of treatment for pregnancy and delivery.
Further, as the AVF has expanded its reliance on
females to satisfy manpower needs, the value of
retaining trained personnel has increased. This is
particularly important to note as women are invited
to join the ranks of an increasing number of military occupational specialties. As more women avail
themselves of this opportunity, the issue of training costs, including time required to complete training, for highly skilled personnel becomes a more
central concern.
The ethical argument fits “hand in glove” with
the practical considerations. From an ethical perspective, it is clearly unfair to punish females for
becoming pregnant by expulsion when the participation of a male is required for the attainment of
that status. Further, it has been suggested that
women might be less inclined to experience long
and difficult training if they were confronted with
an automatic discharge if they became pregnant.
Therefore, it is argued here that the change in pregnancy policy of the military that permits women
who become pregnant to remain in the military if
they wish, reflects an ethically correct decision. This
change is also perceived to be economically sound,
and to contribute positively to the primary goal of
operational readiness.
Similarly, a second major category of admissions
are those for conditions related to pregnancy. These
include spontaneous abortions, disease of the ovary,
and symptoms of the genitourinary system. In the
same manner that the above argument regarding
pregnancy was advanced, it is perceived to be crucial, from an ethical perspective, to afford this category substantial analysis. Are these conditions reflective of possible exposure to occupational reproduction hazards, such as biological or chemical
agents, radiation, or high stress levels?
Data from the Hoiberg and White study indicate
that women are most susceptible to stress-related
conditions during the first year of their service.
These data indicate a need for a more comprehensive effort to prepare women for a military career.
It is my opinion that the more recent move toward
gender-mixed basic training is an ethical and responsible move toward that end, and reflects a
major change in the thrust of military resocialization
efforts. Candidly, however, the large number of
sexual abuse cases experienced by the armed forces
during the second half of the 1990s generated substantial additional reconsideration of this issue.
Hospital rates for mental disorders, respiratory
and infectious diseases, as well as accidental injury
rates declined during the time of the study. The
improvement of occupational training methods has
influenced the latter. 14(pp79–90) All of these conditions
have been aided, however, by the collective DoD
directives mandating a healthier lifestyle. These
directives have become an inherent component of
the resocialization process of military personnel. 21
Although these data are encouraging and represent findings that are similar to those noted for civilian workers, the military must provide somewhat
different specialty practitioners. Military medicine
was specifically designed to provide as efficient care
as possible to those wounded in battle. For the most
part, this called for a physician staff composed primarily, if not exclusively, of battlefield surgeons.
The importance of this component to victory may
be noted by a historically greater loss of personnel
for medical reasons than loss to enemy fire. For example, during the War Between the States (ie, the
American Civil War) it is estimated that the ratio of
deaths from disease versus combat was 2:1 for
Union forces and 3:1 for Confederate forces. 22
With the dramatic increase in female personnel,
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
728
in conjunction with the force becoming one in which
the majority is married, specialists of a wide variety, including obstetricians, gynecologists, pediatricians, and psychiatrists, have become ethically,
if not legally, mandated. This change in medical
personnel has required a substantial resocialization
effort, especially of the senior commissioned and
noncommissioned officers who came into the military when it was predominantly a bachelor and
male-dominated institution.
Military Care Issues Related to Military Spouses
and Children
Although the primary mission of the Military
Health Services System (MHSS) is to maintain the
health of military personnel for the purpose of operational readiness, the military medical system
provides care to family members and retirees and
their family members where space and professional
services are available. Even though the reduction
in force size has affected the number of potential
beneficiaries, there remain within the present military healthcare system approximately 8. 5 million
persons eligible for healthcare programs. 23 A substantial proportion of those eligible are civilian
spouses and dependent children. It is impossible
for military medical care providers to accurately
predict for whom or for what reason care will be
requested from the potential consumer population.
It must be recognized also that healthcare demands
will come from multiple sources competing for
scarce resources (ie, competing branches of the services including base hospitals, PRIMUS [Primary
Care for the Uniformed Services] and NAVCARE
[Navy Care] clinic facilities, Uniformed Services
Treatment Facilities, TRICARE [Tri-Service Care],
Medicare, Veterans Administration hospitals, and
other third-party insurers, including health maintenance organizations [HMOs] and preferred provider organizations [PPOs]). 24 In response to the
complexity of beneficiaries, the provider network
and expanding costs, DoD has initiated implementation of a new management initiative labeled
TRICARE.
Since 1967 civilian healthcare has been provided
to military dependents, retirees, and retiree’s dependents through the fee for service Civilian Health
and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services
(CHAMPUS). CHAMPUS was initiated to provide
healthcare benefits to retired personnel until they
were 65 years of age and eligible for Medicare. The
proportion of the eligible population of beneficiaries grew from about 8% in 1950 to over 50% in 1997.
A similar rise in the number of beneficiaries occurred after the armed services became an all volunteer force in 1973. This signaled the beginning of
a growing population of active duty personnel who
are married. Although civilian spouses and children
could receive healthcare at military medical facilities,
such care was available also through CHAMPUS.
Beginning in 1995, DoD began to provide beneficiaries with TRICARE, or three selection options.
The three legs of this program include: (1) receipt
of care through a DoD managed health maintenance
organization (HMO); (2) receipt of care through a
preferred provider organization (PPO); or (3) continued use of CHAMPUS. 25
As noted, an important reason for the advent of
TRICARE was to reduce healthcare expenditures.
Success has not been achieved on this dimension.
As a result, additional action is under consideration.
One idea currently being tested is Medicare subvention funding. Under this program, MHSS would
receive payment from Medicare for care provided
military retirees 65 years of age and older. Reactions
to this program have been mixed. 26 Other options
for retirees currently under consideration involve
extending access to the Federal Employees Health
Benefits Program (FEHBP) and extending eligibility for TRICARE. 26(p2)
In light of the smaller number of active duty personnel, a 15% reduction in military medical personnel, and one-third fewer military hospitals, some
students of military healthcare have, less generously, proposed a major curtailment of those eligible
to receive military healthcare. The argument is to
serve only active duty personnel. Although this type
of proposal is not likely to be seriously considered,
it does symbolize the vulnerability of ethical and
moral considerations when confronted with the reality of economic constraints.
Beyond the organization of care options, mention should be made of complaints about care received in military medical facilities. Such complaints have been ongoing since the availability of
healthcare to military dependents (after the Korean
War) and continued into the 1990s. Some consumer
criticism is justified and some can be explained by
factors unique to the military. For example, because
military personnel and their family members are a
transient population, due to the reassignment system, there is limited opportunity to maintain continuity of care. Continuous care provided by the same
healthcare professional(s) has long been a significant variable in accounting for the degree of satisfaction expressed by consumers of healthcare. Patients utilizing civilian health maintenance organiSocietal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
729
zations have, in recent years, expressed the same
dissatisfaction. Burrelli27 has noted that mobility
also contributes to dissatisfaction because of an inconsistent quality of services offered at different
installations. Indeed, it can be argued reasonably
that because mobility increases one’s exposure to
treatment by multiple healthcare professionals there
is an inevitable increase in recognition and awareness of the disparity of care offered.
Dissatisfaction, of course, can be profitably used
to identify areas of concern that can and should be
addressed. With regard to this discussion, one of
the most important latent functions of healthcare,
as provided by the military, is the level of satisfaction registered by all members of the family unit.
Orthner28 and Stanley, Segal, and Laughton29 have
noted in research regarding family contributions to
work commitments that spouse support was the
most important predictor of a career commitment
among married men in the military. Thus, satisfaction with healthcare received by a civilian spouse and
children disproportionately influences reenlistment
decisions.
This is increasingly important to recognize within
the AVF, where maintenance of the historical 50-50
mix between careerist and first-termers is sought.
Ensuring that one of every two volunteers reenlists
requires addressing the concerns of these people.
Given that the majority of the force is now married,
the contentment of the civilian spouse assumes additional importance. Discontentment with military
healthcare may encourage a larger proportion of
first term enlistees to decline an invitation to remain. Indeed, the availability of military healthcare
has traditionally been a more important part of the
recruitment and retention strategies for military
personnel than for private employers. As such,
healthcare is a critical issue for the overall strategic
posture and effectiveness of US military organizations. (Exhibit 22-1 offers background information
on healthcare for military family members and suggests a system for providing that care in the future.)
SEXUAL PREFERENCE
It is difficult to conceive of any issue that has or
could generate the level of controversy observed
regarding issues of sexual preference for individuals serving in the US armed services. Viewed retrospectively, the integration of African-Americans and
the increasing acceptance of women in roles previously considered inappropriate, including that of
combatants, have been hugely successful in
resocializing those who so strongly resented the
presence of African-Americans and women. Indeed,
the old traditional notion that democracy has no
place in the military, and would only serve to undermine good order, is no longer chanted with such
reverence. Similar success in the area of acceptance
of sexual preference, and with it the integration of
homosexuals into the military, however, is more
problematic.
The United States is not the first country to debate the issue of homosexuals serving in the military. Most Western democracies with an industrialized economy have confronted this issue in one
form or another. Inevitably, industrialization, accompanied by urbanization, has functioned to introduce dramatic social change. One significant
evolvement has been the democratic ethos that extends the equality of citizenship rights to previously
excluded categories of persons,30(p261) for example,
within the US military. This process has served to
enhance capability and increase manpower, and has
resulted in the integration of African-Americans
and the increasing acceptance of women in nontraditional military roles.
The social-historical context of the country, the
military, and their interrelationship will be the backdrop in determining future policies and practices
regarding homosexuals within the US military. Scott
and Stanley30 have suggested that the issue of homosexuality provides a series of challenges to the
military, not as a causal variable, but as one of the
changes introduced through modernization. Indeed,
prior to the evolvement of any degree of tolerance
for homosexuality, the traditional reproductive and
economic functions of the family experienced significant redefinition. 30(p262) The weakening of institutions has resulted in placing greater priority on
individualism, personal freedom, and satisfaction
than on group interests. However, dispute associated
with issues surrounding homosexuality continues,
as is noted by the moral imperatives articulated by
the conservative perspective and the emphasis on
civil rights and equality of opportunity presented
by more liberal advocates.
Societal views of homosexuality have undergone
change in the past few decades. Pursuant to general American Psychological Association guidelines,
more persons now perceive homosexuality as a
lifestyle, deviant or alternative, chosen or genetically determined, than as a pathology. An increased
level of tolerance has resulted in greater support in
public sectors such as employment and housing, but
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
730
most persons remain reluctant to extend equal opportunities in the more personal areas such as the
right to marry or adopt children. Hesitancy about
the latter holds implications for the status of homosexuals in American society. The US military is
inevitably affected by this conflicting configuration
of tolerance and intolerance. By altering the exclusionary ban within the military, powerful feelings
and political components, in and outside of the
military, continue to experience confrontation.
It can be argued that the general phenomenon of
modernization has worked to weaken the boundaries between the military and society and that the
meaning of service has been altered. Traditionally,
military service was perceived as a rite of passage
into manhood and an obligation of citizenship.
More recently, serving in the armed forces has begun
to be viewed as a right versus obligation of citizenship, and represents a path through which additional
rights may be achieved. As Moskos’ institutional/
occupational thesis has suggested, military service
is now viewed as affording employment opportunities and benefits, rather than as a “calling.”
The collective role of the military has also undergone change. Although the central role remains
that of maintenance of operational readiness (ie, to
protect and defend the nation), supplemental tasks
(ie, peacekeeping) and humanitarian functions (ie,
relief and rescue missions) have emerged. These
changing roles have encouraged successful resocialEXHIBIT 22-1
THE PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE OF HEALTHCARE FOR RETIREES AND FAMILY
MEMBERS
Although the statutory authority for the provision of healthcare was not clear historically, the origin of the
belief that easy-access and high-quality healthcare is a right of members of the military and their family members as well as retirees and their family members has been explained by Burrelli.
Health care for retirees and dependents has always been considered a somewhat ancillary function of the military
health care system. Prior to 1956, the statutory authority to provide health care to retirees and dependents was not
clear. The Dependents’ Medical Care Act (Public Law 84-569); June 7, 1956; 70 Stat. 250) described and defined retiree/dependent eligibility for health care at military facilities as being on a space available basis. Authority was also
provided to care for retirees and their dependents at these facilities (without entitlement) on a space available basis.
This legislation also authorized the imposition of charges for outpatient care for such dependents as determined by
the Secretary of Defense. Although no authority for entitlements was extended to retirees and their dependents, the
availability of health care was almost assured given the small number of such persons. Therefore, while not legally
authorized, for many the “promise” of “free” health care “for life” was functionally true. This “promise,” it is widely
believed, was and continues to be a useful tool for recruiting and retention purposes. 1(p2)
Even though it is impossible to predict the rate of usage by those who perceive themselves to be eligible, the
annual requests by number and cost have consistently surpassed the estimates put forth by the Department of
Defense. 2(p551) If the “promise” of “free” healthcare “for life” is to continue within an increasingly complex
environment, attention must be directed to the manner in which it will be delivered. Blair, Stanley, and Whitehead2 have proposed a stakeholder management strategy to transform the complex relationships within and
between the variety of organizations comprising the military healthcare system into a logical, systematic framework that can be communicated and acted on, such as that proposed by Blair and Fottler. 3(p556)
Stakeholders within the military healthcare system are numerous and any effort of management will be complex. They include beneficiaries, providers, politicians, and a number of special interest groups such as the
American Medical Association (AMA) and the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP). Military
healthcare also exists in the public sector and is thereby the target of political pressures from diverse patient
groups represented by enlisted and officer, active and retired, and veterans groups as well as that of the US
Congress. Clearly, interests and motivations of these diverse stakeholders are not always congruent. However,
to survive the dramatic changes currently facing the military healthcare system, healthcare leaders must improve their management of internal and external stakeholders.
Sources: (1) Burrelli DF. Military Health Care/CHAMPUS Management Initiatives, CRS Report for Congress 91-420F; Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress; May 1991: 2. (2) Blair JD, Stanley J, Whitehead CJ. A stakeholder management perspective on military health care. Armed Forces Soc. 1992;18(4):548–575. (3) Blair JD, Fottler MD.
Challenges in Health Care Management: Strategic Perspectives for Managing Key Stakeholders. San Francisco: Jossey Bass; 1990.
Societal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
731
ization efforts toward the inclusion of previously
excluded groups, especially women. Demand for
traditional masculine skills has been replaced, or
at least reduced, by the increasing need for technical, administrative, clerical, social work, and
healthcare functions.
Despite these restructuring changes, resistance
to the integration of homosexuals remains strong.
This resistance, however, is not universal, and evidence indicates that it is much more likely to be
expressed by male than female service members.
Males have reported a variety of concerns regarding such issues as potential threats to morale, cohesion, and effectiveness associated with the integration of homosexuals. Although advocates of civil
rights and equal opportunity for homosexuals have
argued similarities with the integration of AfricanAmericans and women, a number of differences can
be identified. Skin color, race, and gender are seen
as simple biological traits. In contrast, homosexuality has behavioral components that challenge traditional values that are expressed in assumptions
about morality, sexuality, and masculinity. Given
that the presence of women called into question the
military as a masculine domain, homosexuality extends the question.
The variable of timing, in conjunction with other
issues of importance to the society, is one of the most
important determinants of the likelihood of an element of social change being adopted or rejected. The
timing of the introduction of the ideas of integration of African-Americans and women are illustrative. Successful integration of African-Americans
was aided by the military necessity of manpower
for the Korean War. Integration of women was facilitated by the move toward the AVF and personnel needs related to technology. However, contemporary reduced manpower needs do not argue for
recognition of homosexuals. Further, cultural ambivalence and an absence of a supportive legal environment will likely impede the integration of gays
and lesbians into the larger society and the military as a microcosm thereof. 30(pp262–263)
Nevertheless, homosexuality in the military continues to receive increasing attention from academic
and lay publications. The complexity of the issue
from the perspective of individual and civil rights,
legalities of exclusion-inclusion, profiles of other
nations’ integrative efforts, and debate regarding
ethical and moral considerations precludes easy and
simplistic solutions, such as the current “Don’t Ask,
Don’t Tell” policy. However, the thought and reason represented in a continued dialogue will enhance understanding and provide a backdrop for
the evolution of social and military policy.
The Impact of Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
Practitioners of healthcare within the military
have long dealt with sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs). Venereal diseases such as syphilis or gonorrhea, however, were primarily transmitted through
heterosexual intercourse. In order to respond appropriately to an STD that was originally related to
homosexual behavior, some resocialization effort
was required in order for military healthcare professionals to begin to accommodate those persons
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), which can become acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). AIDS is a contagious and
fatal disease that has generated considerable controversy throughout the world. Upon the discovery of AIDS in 1984, initial research indicated that
the virus was transmitted sexually through bodily
fluids, the sharing of needles by intravenous (IV)
drug users, or contact with tainted blood. Although
one can obviously contract HIV/AIDS through any
number of activities, including heterosexual intercourse, AIDS cases in the United States had been
concentrated among those individuals engaging in
homosexual acts and IV drug usage. These highrisk behaviors had accounted for the vast majority
of all AIDS cases. 31(p453) Increasing incidence of transmission through heterosexual contact will alter this
profile in years to come.
Perhaps a brief note regarding progress in the
treatment of those experiencing HIV/AIDS will be
helpful. The very early research for drugs to block
the replication and growth of the virus experienced
a dramatically positive result with the discovery of
azidothymidine (AZT). This drug, first tested with
patients in July 1985, was demonstrated to have
such efficacy in retarding the disease progression
that the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved it for marketing in March 1987. 32(p159) Inevitably, such success elevated expectations for a cure
to be developed quickly. However, only four additional drugs, zidovudine, didanosine, zalcitabine, and
stavudine, all with limited effectiveness, were licensed by the FDA through the following decade.
This slowing of progress introduced the question
of whether a combination of drugs could enhance
the success of AZT. 32(pp159–161)
In response, a number of research protocols with
various drug combinations were initiated. Early
results of some of these combinations are promising for those fortunate enough to have access to,
and respond to, such therapy. The “cocktail” mixture of drugs seems to have slowed the progression
of the disease and stimulated hope for many. As
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
732
with the introduction of AZT, however, the hope
may well be false hope. That is, some may believe
that if they become infected it will not constitute a
significant problem because of the available drug
therapies.
AIDS has been 100% fatal in the past. Even
though the cocktail has had dramatic effects on the
progression of the disease, it is too early to cite a
cure, or even permanent management of the disease. Further, and as with other diseases, HIV/AIDS
is hosted and develops differently in different individuals. It must be remembered that each of us is a
unique biochemical organism. Consequently, no
two persons will receive treatment modalities with
precisely the same results.
While the incidence of AIDS has continued to increase within the general population, the rate among
military applicants has declined, as has the number who originally tested negative, but subsequently
registered a positive result—the seroconversion
rate. 31(p454) These positive observations concerning
military applicants are reflective of the ability of the
Department of Defense to assume the lead in dealing
with contagious diseases. Because of the military’s
ability to introduce large-scale observation and
treatment, it has become an ideal institution within
which at least some societal policies can be introduced and examined.
The assumption of an active role by the military
regarding HIV/AIDS, however, has not been embraced by all armed forces personnel. Initially, the
human immunodeficiency virus and AIDS were
identified primarily among homosexuals and IV
drug users, and that perception has been slow to
change. These are categories of persons whom the
military has prohibited from enlisting in the past.
Even though the military in the mid-1990s introduced the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy for homosexuals, the implementation and interpretation of
this policy have been inconsistent within and across
the services. Controversy regarding individual civil
rights and privacy versus protection of the general
public has surrounded DoD policy related to those
who test positive. In addressing the operational
readiness of the force, DoD policy has attempted to
balance these competing perspectives. 31(p462)
Military Policy Regarding Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Among the US civilian population, concern with
HIV/AIDS is functioning to pressure legislators
throughout the country to pass laws to protect the
public. This reflects a shift of focus from earlier laws
to protect the civil liberties of HIV-infected persons,
to laws that, in some cases, punish those who knowingly place others at risk of contracting the virus.
At least 29 states have enacted such legislation. 33
Current DoD policy calls for repeated testing of
personnel, screening of blood supplies, and the development of educational and surveillance initiatives. Beyond these considerations, and similar to
the evolving national orientation, continued involvement in sexual relations by those positively
tested, without informing their partner(s) of their
infection, can and has resulted in courts-martial. 34–36
Conversely, civilian dependents of military personnel who test positively for HIV/AIDS offer a different set of concerns as they cannot be forced into
testing, and are outside of the sociomedical constraints of the military. 31(p470)
In addition, current policy does not call for the
removal of HIV-infected persons from the military
environment. It is clear that if such an aggressive
policy were adopted, the rights of the uninfected,
civilian and military, would be more protected and
the readiness of the force would be enhanced. However, pursuit of such a restrictive policy would violate some perceptions of civil rights. Indeed, it can
be argued that the overall morbidity rates of the
entire society could be reduced by mandating thorough physical exams every year, 6 months, or 3
months, declaring every product linked with cancer illegal, introducing a required level of physical
fitness, body fat percentage, strength level, and so
forth. Parenthetically, it should be noted that physical fitness parameters of well-being have already
been institutionalized within the US military. Societal introduction of these considerations, however,
would require an abrogation of individual freedom
and are clearly counter to the idea of well-being on
the mental and social dimensions.
An ethical, practical, and legal posture of the
DoD represented by a stringent policy to protect
people in foreign countries from infection by service persons assigned to military installations outside of the United States. DoD policy requires military personnel who test positively for HIV/AIDS
to return to the United States, and those already
infected with the virus are not assigned to foreign
installations. At this time, military personnel infected
with HIV/AIDS are treated similarly to personnel
with other contagious, debilitating, or life-threatening illness, even though the condition presents
concerns that other diseases do not. Most importantly, most of those infected are homosexual males
or intravenous drug users. Historically, these two
categories have either been excluded from military
Societal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
733
service or have been the targets of antagonism. With
the introduction of testing procedures, persons so
categorized, especially homosexuals, feared a
“witch hunt” and the employment of “Gestapolike” tactics in locating and sanctioning them. However, comments of this nature have diminished considerably, a fact that points to a more sound policy.
Distribution of negative and often untrue information remains a concern for US foreign relations. One
claim, put forth by Soviet scientists and later retracted,
argued that AIDS was a biological war product engineered by US Army scientists. 31(p472) The consequences
and concerns are exacerbated for US military relations
when such pejorative propaganda is subscribed to by
the uninformed and isolated, especially in the lessdeveloped countries of the world.
VETERANS’ HEALTHCARE ISSUES AND THE POLITICS OF ELIGIBILITY
During times of relative peace it is probable that
competing dimensions for the provision of healthcare
converge more acutely at the issue of healthcare for
non–active-duty military beneficiaries, especially
for those who enjoy veteran status. Given the reality of finite resources, and especially during periods of budgetary restraint, the ethical questions of
who is to be afforded healthcare, and where, are
underscored.
Historically, the evaluative manner in which the
culture reacts to a given military engagement helps
to define the manner in which returning veterans
adjust to reentry into civilian life. Scott has identified
two significant reasons that healthcare issues are
important for the readjustment of the veteran. 10(p592)
The first is that healthcare issues are related to what
the society defines as normal experiences of military personnel during and after a war. Second, the
issues of liability and compensation for injuries and
disabilities acquired as a result of military service
become pressing questions. With the implied subjectivity of these two statements, determination of
eligibility for medical attention by veterans can easily become a controversial issue. Again, Scott is
helpful in describing the dilemma that has characterized requests by veterans for medical treatment
and compensation for service-connected injuries
and disease. 10(p594)
First, requests may be reflective of unanticipated
consequences of new weaponry. If presented pathologies exceed current parameters of understanding, eligibility for healthcare may be denied. Indeed,
it is almost certain that such will occur following
each armed conflict in which the United States is
involved. Clear knowledge of effects from shortand long-term exposure to US weaponry is not
known (for example, exposure to Agent Orange
during the Vietnam conflict), let alone the arsenals
of enemy forces. Again, economic and ethical considerations coincide. That is, an argument for reduced medical expenditures from a finite budget
may well transcend ethically appropriate considerations. Further, and unfortunately, when a modality of treatment is granted, it may be the product of misdiagnosis.
Second, service-connected health problems of
veterans may not surface until more than a year
after their discharge. Diseases that are not manifested for more than a year after service exposure
increase the difficulty of establishing a cause-andeffect relationship. Competing explanations for the
occurrence of the disease may be introduced without a satisfactory way of judging the relative merits of the counterhypotheses.
Third, conflict arises between the perception that
the veteran is deserving, and the finite resources
available for the provision of care. As Scott notes,
“the certification of sickness among veterans…often
is bitterly contested as altruistic service clashes with
fiscal constraints and political realities.”10(pp594–595) It
is clear that presentation of symptoms of health
problems and consequential treatment is more expansive, and considerably more complex, than these
two variables. Among others, political and economic variables, in conjunction with ethical considerations, must be included.
In order to facilitate an understanding of the
political complexity of veterans’ healthcare issues,
it is necessary to turn to some distinctions that
medical sociologists have traditionally found helpful. Specifically, social scientists have differentiated
the terms of disease, illness, and health,10(p593),37 and
provided a number of approaches for their examination. Disease is used to identify some impairment
to bodily functions; illness refers to the self-perception that one does not feel well or that something is
wrong; and sickness is used to define the affirmation by a medically certified practitioner that one
has a disease or is legitimately not feeling well.
Interpretation of these distinctions is further assisted by an understanding of a variety of behavioral-science approaches. Mechanic has identified
four of these. 38 The first is the cultural approach,
which focuses on the manner in which illness is
perceived, presented, and received. For example,
differing lifestyles and values are reflected in sigMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
734
nificantly different health patterns for divergent
work and family organizational patterns. In essence,
an individual’s reception or rejection of changes for
a healthier lifestyle will reflect the values of the cultural or subcultural environments.
The second is the social-psychological approach,
which overlaps with the cultural, and is concerned
with social interaction, communication, and how
people influence each other. This approach is particularly interesting in the American culture because
independence is so highly valued. Despite the general emphasis on efficacy, many social areas, including healthcare, are perceived by many as a reflection of their development, social position, and life
situation.
The third approach is social. Overlap with the
other approaches is again observable. Followers of
this orientation are concerned with how people accommodate social demands within their physical
and economic environments. This approach also
encompasses legitimacy to the claim of illness, and
appropriate enaction of the sick role.
The societal approach is the final orientation and,
despite clearly being related to those previously
noted, it is the one that is most germane to this discussion. This focus is on the relationship between
health and other social institutions, including the
armed forces. Although the societal approach might
be more abstract, it does hold that different social
components can be identified and the relationships
between them can be examined, for instance, the
relationships between health institutions, the armed
forces, law, and family.
Finally, clarification is afforded by two perspectives that influence reactions to this distinction of
terms and approaches. 10,39 The most prevalent is the
objectivist school. According to this perspective,
evidence of disease will accumulate, thereby inviting
discovery. Although not devoid of political considerations, advocates of this methodological position
believe that through the appropriate employment
of scientific tools, factual evidence of sickness will
become “objectively” observable.
The objectivist perspective is rather sharply contrasted by the constructivist school, which holds
that legitimization of a sickness is primarily a political process. Proponents of this view identify specific
types of evidence and employ available resources to
validate any claims of sickness. Constructivists do
not subscribe to the necessity of a linkage between
injury or disease and the probability of recognition.
Rather claims are advanced by persons able to gain
the attention and respect of appropriate (ie, powerful) persons.
Despite the general prevalence of, and subscription
to, the objectivist school of thought in the determination of cause-and-effect relationships (presentation of empirical data and analysis), the constructivist
perspective is a more salient guide to an understanding of the adjustment of veterans and militaryrelated healthcare issues. This is precisely for the
reasons previously noted—veterans’ expectations
exceeding society’s willingness to provide; unintended consequences from exposure to new technology; and the strain introduced by disorders delinquent in their appearance. Ethically, this scenario
presents an unfortunate juxtaposition between societal expectations and responsibilities. A traditional
and widely held belief is that when one is asked to
serve the country as a member of the armed forces,
all medical and healthcare needs will be accommodated. This implied social contract does not come
with exceptions denoted by asterisks.
Given that military service may well extract the
ultimate cost of one’s life, denial of medical treatment
for presented symptoms that carry the possibility
of being service connected is seen as representing a
denial of ethical responsibility. It might well be argued that such denial, subjectivist or not, is particularly troublesome in light of the extensive
healthcare that has been provided veterans who
have presented non–service-connected conditions
for treatment. Clearly, veterans of all wars present
readjustment needs. The manner in which these
needs, medical or otherwise, are met will maximize
or minimize the readjustment difficulties. Retrospectively, it appears obvious that responses to veterans needs are more positive for those armed conflicts that the public favored, most notably World
War II; while conflicts that concluded in a stalemate—
the Korean War—or in a perceived defeat—Vietnam—result in less favorable or supportive action.
The presentation of the same or similar symptoms by veterans of different confrontations can and
has resulted in dramatically different levels of acceptance and treatment. Ethically, registered differences in public perception and treatment modalities cannot be justified, and represent an area in
need of examination. As noted earlier, the issue is
illustrated by the American veterans of the Vietnam
War who were forced into major controversial subjectivist battles to gain answers and treatment for
the troubling and serious health problems related
to PTSD and exposure to Agent Orange, the defoliant herbicide. Examining relevant issues in a chronological sequence, and identifying the protagonists
and antagonists, Scott developed a sociology of
veterans’ issues. 39(Chap9) He emphasizes that “probSocietal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
735
lems that lack effective advocates generally escape
our attention.”39(pxvii) Veterans of Vietnam have benefited from strong advocates, although the path toward recognition of PTSD as a legitimate basis for
medical attention, and validation of conditions resulting from exposure to Agent Orange, was a cyclical and undulating one.
Indeed, given the controversy the war generated,
the heterogeneity of those who served, and continuous changes within the political landscape, (eg, successive presidents, directors of the Department of
Veterans Affairs [DVA], and budget directors), the
confrontation process was not a continuous or linear
evolution. It is noteworthy, and perhaps surprising,
that the major opposition came from “The Iron Triangle.” This is a collective composed of the Department of Veterans Affairs, Disabled American Veterans, and the House Committee on Veterans Affairs.
The core of the argument again focused on a finite
level of resources. Veterans of World War II and Korea dominated the patient lists of the VA during the
1960s. These were men reaching middle age and
whose presentations of disease, illness, and sickness
were overwhelmingly (85%) nonservice connected.
Younger Vietnam veterans changed that scenario with
presentations requiring treatment and rehabilitation
for war-sustained injuries and diseases. This resulted
in great financial and manpower stress to the system.
One of the most challenging areas was that of
PTSD. The difficulties and chronology of finally
getting this condition entered into the American
Psychiatric Association publication Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual III is well chronicled by Scott. 39
He similarly presents the decade-long struggle to
earn legal culpability for conditions believed to be
the result of exposure to Agent Orange. 39 Once that
was determined, and the appeal process completed,
the DVA extended the presumption of service connection to Vietnam veterans presenting any number
of diseases, most notably non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
In sum, the politics of the health component for
the readjustment of the Vietnam veteran transcended the legal, political, economic, and family
institutions as well as that of the military. As such,
the societal approach was clearly reflected, although
with significant influence from the cultural, social
psychological, and social approaches. Additionally,
the politics of legitimating PTSD and Agent Orange
as causative factors of disease represent a classic
illustration of the constructivist approach, and ultimately an ethical victory. The achievement of these
victories required a successful resocialization effort
for a large number of diverse persons and institutions.
One of the important segments of the resocialization
effort was communicating the multidimensional
nature of well-being.
One result of the Vietnam veterans’ movements
may be the emergence of a politically more sensitive and caring posture toward veterans. Although
an accurate assessment of long-term results will
require an extensive period of time, some preliminary evidence is available. It can be noted, for example, that there seem to be no parallel experiences
described by veterans of the 1983 Grenada expedition, the 1986 Libyan strike, or the 1988 invasion of
Panama, probably due to the short duration, minimal casualties, and limited combat engagements.
Unfortunately, veterans of the Persian Gulf War
(1990–1991) have mirrored the Vietnam case by presenting a variety of symptoms for which the causes
are not very well understood. Political sensitization
and appropriate ethical considerations have been
reflected, however, by virtue of the passage of a temporary disability benefit package for these veterans in conjunction with a substantial award for research and marriage and family counseling.
CONCLUSION
Healthcare issues are increasingly complex as
they reflect sociocultural and ethical considerations
of a given society. The military, although representing a society, is also a specific subunit of the whole.
Thus, it is necessary to understand the underlying
perspectives of resocialization of healthcare personnel as well as those who are potentially in receipt
of such. The multidimensional orientation toward
well-being espoused by the World Health Organization can be of help.
Military healthcare, in conjunction with the
healthcare of the American society, is experiencing
a major transitional period. Emphasis has been
placed on the needs and interests of persons serving
in the armed forces, their civilian family members,
and veterans, vis-à-vis increasing sociodemographic
diversity. Recent demographic changes in the composition of the AVF have resulted in consideration
being given to the availability and distribution of
healthcare to women who serve, and to those who
are civilian spouses. Gender considerations have
created a need for evaluating health risks in terms
of assignment as women become eligible for more
nontraditional military occupational specialties; a
need for an expanded availability of different specialists; and attention to the potential of additional
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
736
stress as representatives of a minority of those serving. Satisfaction with personal healthcare, and that
received by children in military families, is perhaps
the most important variable in determining whether
the civilian spouse will encourage reenlistment. In
this regard stakeholder management is very important to achieving satisfaction.
A significant contemporary issue with healthcare
implications is that of sexual preference. Although
some might compare the integration of homosexuals in the military with that of African-Americans
and women, a similar transition does not appear to
be likely. The difficulty is exacerbated by the concern that HIV/AIDS, although it can be transmitted via heterosexual activity, has been overwhelmingly passed from one person to another through
the sharing of needles in intravenous drug usage
and homosexual behavior.
All who serve in the military risk life, limb, and
well-being. However, some service-connected diseases and disabilities are slow to be officially recognized because of political difficulties. In particular
are those conditions that might result as unanticipated
consequences of technological developments for
new weaponry; presentation of symptoms that
might not be manifest for some time (perhaps a year
or more); and the contrast between what the veteran is perceived to deserve and the inability, due
to finite resources, to completely or even adequately
address that perception.
There are a number of ways to understand these
complex healthcare issues. Distinguishing between
disease, illness, and sickness helps clarify the issues
as do a number of behavioral-science approaches. I
offered two perspectives, objectivist and constructivist, to help navigate the maze. Ultimately, legitimization and treatment of veterans for conditions believed
to be the result of exposure to the herbicide defoliant
Agent Orange, and for those veterans suffering from
posttraumatic stress disorder evolved from the
constructivist approach, which functions to certify
sickness through an inherently political process.
How the dramatically complicated military
healthcare picture will be accommodated in the future is, of course, unknown. However, the “sociology of veterans’ issues,” generated by Scott, through
the constructivist approach, has clearly influenced
the US Congress in the direction of a more ethically
sensitive reaction to veterans presenting symptoms
of the Gulf War illnesses.
It is anticipated that future military healthcare
efforts will be responsive to the variables noted in
the sociocultural landscape throughout this chapter. Additionally, it is expected that greater attention will be directed toward the resocialization of
providers and recipients, ethical issues related to
care, and a multidimensional conceptualization of
what constitutes well-being.
REFERENCES
1.
Lerner M. Conceptualization of health and social well-being. Health Serv Res. 1973;8(1):6–12.
2.
Lerner M. Conference on social sciences in health at APHA. Health Serv Res. 1974;9(4):340–347.
3.
Moskos CC. Institutional and occupational trends in armed forces. In: Moskos CC, Wood FR, eds. The Military:
More Than A Job? Great Britain: Pergamon-Brassey’s International Defense Publishers Inc; 1988: Chap 2.
4.
Segal DR. Recruiting for Uncle Sam: Citizenship and Military Manpower Policy. Lawrence: University of Kansas
Press; 1989.
5.
Coser LA. Greedy Institutions: Patterns of Undivided Commitment. New York: Free Press; 1974.
6.
Llewellyn C. Education and training for war surgery. Mil Med. 1990;155(4):192–193.
7.
Smith AM. Military medicine: Not the same as practicing medicine in the military. Armed Forces Soc.
1992;18(4):576–591.
8.
Stanley J. Introduction: An invitation to revisit Lasswell’s garrison state. In: Stanley J, ed. Essays on the Garrison
State. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers; 1997: 22–25.
9.
Stanley J, Blair JD. Introduction: Challenges in military health care. In: Stanley J, Blair JD, eds. Challenges in
Military Health Care: Perspectives on Health Status and the Provision of Care. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Publishers; 1993.
Societal Influences and the Ethics of Military Healthcare
737
10.
Scott WJ. PTSD and Agent Orange: Implications for a sociology of veterans’ issues. Armed Forces Soc.
1992;18(4):592–612.
11.
VA Fact Sheet, Department of Veterans Affairs (Online). March, 1997.
12.
Brown D. $3 million study of Gulf war illnesses criticized: Pentagon bypassed competitive procedures in picking researcher who sees several syndromes. New York Times. 8 November 1997:A-11.
13.
Redhead CS, Rastogi A. Gulf war veterans’ illnesses: Federal research and legislative mandates. CRS Report for
Congress. 5 January 1998:1.
14.
Hoiberg A, White JF. Health status of women in the armed forces. In: Stanley J, Blair JD, eds. Challenges in
Military Health Care: Perspectives on Health Status and the Provision of Care. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Publishers; 1993: 73–92.
15.
Treadwell ME. US Army in World War II: Special Studies—The Women’s Army Corps. Washington, DC: Office of
the Chief of Military History, Department of the Army; 1954, as cited in Hoiberg A, White JF. Health status of
women in the armed forces. In: Stanley J, Blair JD, eds. Challenges in Military Health Care: Perspectives on Health
Status and the Provision of Care. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers; 1993.
16.
Women’s Research and Education Institute (WREI). Women in the Military: Where They Stand. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: WREI; 1998.
17.
Stanley SC. Women in the Military. New York: Jullian Messner; 1993.
18.
Bryant CD. Olive-drab drunks and GI junkies: Alcohol and narcotic addiction in the US military. In: Bryant CD,
ed. Deviant Behavior, Occupational and Organizational Bases. Chicago, Ill: Rand McNally; 1974.
19.
Bray RM, Kroutil LA, Marsden ME. Trends in alcohol, illicit drug, and cigarette use among US military personnel: 1980–1992. Armed Forces Soc. 1995;21(2):271–293.
20.
Kanter R. Men and Women of the Corporation. New York: Basic Books; 1977.
21.
Stanley J, Blair JD. Emerging perspectives on military health care. In: Stanley J, Blair JD, eds. Challenges in
Military Health Care. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers; 1993: Chap 9.
22.
Catton B. The American Heritage Picture History of the Civil War. New York: Random House; 1988: 371.
23.
Burrelli David F. Congressional Research Service, The Library of Congress. Personal Communication, 28 September 1998.
24.
Blair JD, Stanley J, Whitehead CJ. A stakeholder management perspective on military health care. Armed Forces
Soc. 1992;18(4):551.
25.
Best RA Jr. Military medical care services: Questions and answers. CRS Issues Brief. 5 August 1998:1–6.
26.
Burrelli DF. Military medical care and Medicare subvention funding. CRS Report for Congress. Washington, DC:
Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress; 17 March 1997:1–4.
27.
Burrelli DF. Military health care/CHAMPUS management initiative. CRS Report for Congress 91-420F. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress; May 1991:2.
28.
Orthner DK. Family contributions to work commitment. J Marriage Fam. 1986;48:578–581.
29.
Stanley J, Segal MW, Laughton CJ. Grass roots family action and military policy responses. [Marriage and
Family Review special issue]. Corporations, Business and Families. 15(3-4):207–223.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
738
30.
Scott WJ, Stanley SC. Conclusion: Directions for the future. Gays and Lesbians in the Military. New York: Aldine
de Gruyter; 1994.
31.
Burrelli DF. HIV-1/AIDS and US military manpower policy. Armed Forces Soc. 1992;18(4):453.
32.
Cooper EC. Treatment of HIV disease: Problems, progress, and potential. In: Mann J, Tarantola D, eds. AIDS in
the World II. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996.
33.
New York Times. 25 September 1998:1.
34.
Associated Press. Military judge convicts soldiers of two AIDS related offenses. Washington Post. 28 July 1998:A13.
35.
Scicchitano JP. Worst by far AIDS case ends in assault verdict. Army Times. 12 December 1988:23.
36.
Associated Press. Ex-fiancee charges sailor failed to tell her about HIV. Washington Times. 10 May 1988.
37.
Lewis A. Health as a social concept. Br J Sociol. 1953;4:109–124.
38.
Mechanic D. Medical Sociology. 2nd ed. New York: Free Press; 1978: 54–92.
39.
Scott WJ. The Politics of Readjustment: Vietnam Veterans Since the War. New York: Aldine de Gruyter; 1993.
