Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
367
MILITARY MEDICAL ETHICS
VOLUME 2
SECTION IV: MEDICAL ETHICS IN THE MILITARY
Section Editor:
THOMAS E. BEAM, MD
Formerly Director, Borden Institute
Formerly, Medical Ethics Consultant to The Surgeon General, United States Army
Robert Benney
Shock Tent
circa World War II
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
368
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
369
Chapter 13
MEDICAL ETHICS ON THE BATTLEFIELD:
THE CRUCIBLE OF MILITARY
MEDICAL ETHICS
THOMAS E. BEAM, MD*
INTRODUCTION
RETURN TO DUTY CONSIDERATIONS IN A THEATER OF OPERATIONS
Getting Minimally Wounded Soldiers Back to Duty
Combat Stress Disorder
“Preserve the Fighting Strength”
Informed Consent
Beneficence for the Soldier in Combat
Enforced Treatment for Individual Soldiers
BATTLEFIELD TRIAGE
The Concept of Triage
Establishing and Maintaining Prioritization of Treatment
Models of Triage
Examining the Extreme Conditions Model
EUTHANASIA ON THE BATTLEFIELD
Understanding the Dynamics of the Battlefield: The Swann Scenario
A Brief History of Battlefield Euthanasia
A Civilian Example From a “Battlefield” Setting
Available Courses of Action: The Swann Scenario
Ethical Analysis of Options
PARTICIPATION IN INTERROGATION OF PRISONERS OF WAR
Restrictions Imposed by the Geneva Conventions
“Moral Distancing”
Developing and Participating in Torture
Battlefield Cases of Physician Participation in Torture
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, United States Army; formerly, Director, Borden Institute, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington,
DC 20307-5001 and Medical Ethics Consultant to The Surgeon General, United States Army; formerly, Director, Operating Room, 28th
Combat Support Hospital (deployed to Saudi Arabia and Iraq, Persian Gulf War)
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
370
Robert Benney
The Battle of the Caves
Anzio, 1944
The painting depicts battlefield medicine in the Mediterranean theater in World War II. These soldiers, with their
wounded and medical assets, have taken a position in a cave. The medical corpsman is doing the best he can for his
patient in the chaos and close quarters of the battle.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC. Available at: http://
www.armymedicine.army.mil/history/art/mto.htm.
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
371
INTRODUCTION
otic scene. Added to the unpredictable nature of the
battlefield will be the predictable constraints necessitated by the logistics of combat. There will be very
limited medical resources on the battlefield. For the
modern battlefield, medical personnel will carry
their initial supplies, including medications, with
them. There will be uncertainty of resupply. 1 In
these circumstances, medical personnel will be unable to expend large amounts of IV fluid or blood
(or potentially even antibiotics or pain medications)
on any single casualty.
The plan for rapid evacuation of casualties from
the battlefield to hospitals to the rear also may be
difficult to implement. 2 Successful evacuation depends on air superiority, numbers of wounded not
exceeding capability to transport them, and a generally favorable flow of battle. If the battle is going
against US forces, it is less likely that air superiority will have been achieved, that air assets will be
employed to transport wounded, or that these air
assets will be able to safely get to the forward facilities to provide the evacuation spaces. In this fluid
battlefield, it is not at all unlikely that the enemy
will overrun some forward hospitals and capture
medical personnel.
Although captured medical personnel are afforded certain rights by the Geneva Conventions,3
(including the opportunity to continue to treat their
wounded prisoners of war, relief from other duties
in a prisoner of war [POW] camp, and their rapid
repatriation as soon as their medical duties are reasonably completed), it is not at all certain that all
All members of the healthcare team, whether civilian or military, confront ethical challenges on a
daily basis and feel some of those tensions as they
go about their jobs. During peacetime, military
health professionals see the same issues as do their
civilian colleagues, although day-to-day military
medicine presents some additional ethical challenges due to the issues raised by mixed agency,
which is the problem of divided loyalties discussed
previously by Howe in Chapter 12, Mixed Agency
in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict.
However, it is on the battlefield that the greatest
ethical dilemmas arise. The mixed agency issues are
accentuated on the battlefield because the physician
has a legal obligation to place the interests of society (and the military mission of protecting and defending that society) above those of the soldier.
There are simply no comparable situations in the
civilian sector, despite frequent comparisons to
inner-city emergency rooms on “any Saturday
night,” because the weaponry, circumstances, and
participants are so different in combat.
This chapter will examine the elevated stress of
the battlefield, the moral dilemmas encountered
there, and the unique situations in which military
medical personnel must function. The military physician must consider return-to-duty issues that, perhaps more than any other, exemplify the essence of
mixed agency. Battlefield triage will be examined
and models will be presented. The especially difficult
issue of battlefield euthanasia will be extensively
explored. The chapter will also visit the participation of physicians in the interrogation of prisoners
of war. As is evident from these topics, the battlefield
confronts the medical professional with a variety
of profound ethical challenges.
Indeed, it is impossible to imagine a more challenging environment in which to practice medicine
than on the battlefield. It is the antithesis of the ideal
medical setting. It is violent. It is noisy. It is chaotic. It is in constant flux. And it is unpredictable.
Lack of creature comforts is the least of the problems faced. Noise levels prevent normal aspects of
patient care (Figure 13-1). Rapid movement, often
on little or no advance notice, requires treatment
facilities to be set up and taken down very quickly.
Patients can arrive before preparations are completed. Medical personnel, as well as patients, suffer from the fatigue and filth (Figure 13-2).
There are also unique moral dilemmas involved
in decisions on the battlefield, decisions that may
have to be made in the midst of a violent and chaFig. 13-1. This mass casualty situation occurred following a helicopter crash during Operation Desert Shield in
1990. It shows the chaos and resulting noise that often
accompany this kind of event.
FPO
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
372
enemies will respect these accords. This, therefore,
places the medical personnel in the position of not
knowing how they would be treated if captured.
This uncertainty might also affect how they react
to an enemy encounter. This is particularly acute in
the morass of misinformation typically associated
with armed conflict. Often the atrocities attributed
to the enemy are exaggerated and embellished.
Nonetheless, there is occasionally accurate cause for
concern, because noncombatants have been killed
or otherwise mistreated and not afforded their
rights under the Geneva Conventions.
Triage issues involving priorities in treating US
troops, allies, local civilian population, and enemy
troops further heighten the difficulties experienced.
In addition, line commanders may request the use of
medical evacuation assets to remove troops killed in
action (KIA) from the battlefield. This will obviously
create difficulty for medical personnel attempting
to clear the area of wounded. Moral dilemmas also
arise in considering euthanasia on the battlefield,
participation in interrogation of prisoners of war,
and utilization of medical knowledge to achieve a
political end or to extract information from an enemy
soldier. Issues also arise when one is in command
of a unit,4 which heighten the issues of mixed agency,
as addressed by Howe in Chapter 12. Facing all of
these issues at the same time may prove too great a
stress for medical personnel. Decisions that are
made while experiencing this stress and facing these
uncertainties may not be the ones made if one had
the time to carefully weigh and evaluate all factors.
It is imperative, therefore, for all military healthcare
professionals to consider these issues prior to actually being in the “heat of battle.” Pulling a few rotations through a Saturday night emergency room
is in no way comparable to the battlefield, nor an
adequate substitute for training purposes.
First, and foremost, is the issue of the soldier as
a component of a team, rather than as an individual,
and therefore the question of returning him to duty.
In most civilian medical contexts, the patient’s job
responsibilities are not usually the determining
factor in recommending medical treatment. In the
military, particularly on the battlefield, the soldierpatient’s team responsibilities may, however, assume primary importance.
Fig. 13-2. This paraprofessional member of the 28th Combat Support Hospital during combat operations in Iraq
(Operation Desert Storm, 1991) shows the effects of fatigue
and lack of time for personal hygiene. Events leading to
his exhaustion involved protracted convoy operations
into Iraq and immediate establishment of the hospital,
which was followed by continuous treatment of war casualties for more than 72 hours.
RETURN TO DUTY CONSIDERATIONS IN A THEATER OF OPERATIONS
A tension that is faced by nearly all deployed
physicians is the issue of returning a minimally injured patient, or one suffering from combat stress
reaction, to combat. This includes the issue of conflicting duties to the individual patient as well as
to the line commander (mixed agency), which have
been discussed in detail by Howe in Chapter 12.
There are, however, other very difficult issues of balancing the medical indications for treating the injuries or combat stress reaction at the first available
medical treatment facility in an attempt to maximize the good done for the individual patient and
his or her organization, while also recognizing that
some patients may desire evacuation.
FPO
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
373
Getting Minimally Wounded Soldiers Back to Duty
This concern can occur in the sick or minimally
wounded soldier who presents for care. The physician may experience internal conflict between a desire to protect the patient from additional trauma and
the duty to support the needs of the command. This
is the classic mixed agency issue. The line commander
may need to have this particular soldier, with his specific skills, back to continue to fight. In addition, allowing him to avoid combat is antithetical to the concept of justice—treating similar persons in a similar
manner. If one soldier is allowed to leave the theater,
this will force another soldier to assume his responsibilities, thereby causing an inequity of duties. It is also
likely that the remaining soldiers will be exposed to
greater risk due to the loss of a member of the unit,
and the likelihood of any one of the remaining soldiers becoming a casualty is greater.
A greater harm may occur if it becomes well
known that minimal injuries or a mild illness is the
“ticket” home. There may be an avalanche effect on
other members of the unit that would greatly affect
the combat readiness of the command, far more than
just the individual soldier’s presence or absence
from the battle. This is referred to as the “floodgate
phenomenon” and can render an entire unit ineffective for combat. If this were to occur, the ultimate outcome of the battle, or even the war, could
be in jeopardy and many more casualties could follow. This knowledge may help strengthen the resolve of the physician in dealing with the soldier
who is minimally wounded or appears to be a combat stress casualty. However, if this same patient is
brought in again with serious wounds or is killed
in action, the physician certainly may feel some
sense of guilt for the patient’s injury or death. An
even more difficult situation might arise if these
wounds were self-inflicted. In this case, the physician would very likely feel personally responsible
for the soldier’s death or injury. This would almost
certainly affect future return to duty decisions made
by this physician. It is impossible to resolve this issue without significant preliminary thought and
evaluation. Even with the most optimal support and
proactive approach, this tension may lead to an inability to continue to provide care and the physician may become a psychological casualty himself.
Combat Stress Disorder
One of the areas where issues other than pure
mixed agency operate is in combat stress disorder.
Clearly, under current Army doctrine5 the earliest
and closest treatment is in the patient’s best interest. The concept of beneficence would mandate this
course of action. During World War I and World War
II, for instance, it was noted that soldiers experiencing combat stress reaction could often be returned to combat in 24 to 48 hours, if they were
appropriately evaluated and treated when they
appeared at the aid stations. A reassuring “chat”
with the physician or mental health professional,
in which it was noted that theirs was a normal response to the horrors of war, was key. In addition,
soldiers were provided, when possible, with a
shower and “three hots and a cot” (three hot meals
and a cot for sleeping). This approach came to be
known as PIES (proximity to the battlefield; immediacy of intervention after symptom onset; expectancy of recovery to full duty capability; and simplicity of treatment). 6 The history, development, and
application of these principles is fully explored in
Military Psychiatry: Preparing in Peace for War7 and
War Psychiatry. 8
However, if the patient is considered to have full
capacity for making decisions and indicates an
unwillingness to return to combat despite a PIES intervention, the response might be to allow that patient to participate in making those decisions, including the decision to be removed from the battlefield.
In time of conflict, this may have a negative effect
on both the patient and the physician. The patient
likely will be subjected to a court-martial for refusing to return to duty. The physician may also be
subjected to disciplinary proceedings for his actions.
In addition, it is likely to have very negative effects
on unit morale and may also contribute to an evacuation syndrome in which numerous other soldiers
present with the same complaints.
In the guise of respecting the patient’s autonomy,
the physician may be tempted to diagnose the patient as having a more serious psychological disorder and to medically evacuate him from the theater. This course of action contains its own pitfalls.
Although it “protects” a patient either from further
combat or from the legal ramifications of refusal to
fight, it carries an extreme psychological price tag.
During Vietnam, for example, many physicians,
including psychiatrists, inappropriately evacuated
casualties, especially during the latter stages of the
conflict when the Vietnamization policy (letting the
Vietnamese fight their own war, thus minimizing
American casualties) was put in place. Many of
these soldiers developed psychological sequelae as
a result of the questionable circumstances of their
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
374
premature departure from their fellow soldiers. This
psychological morbidity is due to the soldierpatient’s self-perception of failure or his feelings of
guilt at having his comrades injured or killed while
he has “escaped.”9(p119) This can lead to conflict
within the physician, who may feel uneasy in his
paternalistic role of “knowing” that he is treating
the casualty with the “four Rs” (reassure, rest, replenish, and restore confidence) even if the soldier
consistently and apparently rationally requests
evacuation.
Army doctrine stresses the need to override these
soldier requests to be removed from combat. As
long as the soldier has not committed “serious misconduct,” the soldier will best respond to treatment
in proximity to his unit with the full expectation
that he will return to the unit. Therefore, in this situation, the ethical dilemma is not only that of mixed
agency but also the conflicting principles of beneficence (weak paternalism) and respect for the
patient’s autonomy.
A related issue is whether the patient with combat stress reaction is able to be fully autonomous. If
it is possible to declare this patient at least temporarily incapable of participating in decisions, it
greatly relieves this tension. The patient who is in
the acute phase of a serious combat stress reaction
is unlikely to be able to process all information and
details well and may be incapable of participating
in decision making, at least for that short interval
until he responds to treatment.
A more difficult issue would be a patient who
continues to request evacuation, even after the expected brief course of “therapy.” Is the physician
justified in this circumstance in returning the soldier to his unit over the soldier’s expressed and continued desire? Should the benefit from the expected
ultimate response to the doctrinally correct expectancy of treatment determine the appropriateness of
overriding those wishes? How does the physician
balance these seemingly exclusive courses of action?
How autonomous is a soldier who is being sent into
battle? Not very. Clearly the very fact that this person is being ordered to participate in combat raises a
serious question of his being truly autonomous. The
best response may be to attempt, as far as is possible, to respect the somewhat limited autonomy of
the person, while understanding that as a soldier,
by his implicit acceptance of his role, he has given
up a portion of his right to be fully autonomous.
An additional stressor for the physician is the
knowledge that if returned to his unit, the soldier
may be injured or killed. This can be extremely difficult for the physician to accept. He is likely to
question if it is better to be severely wounded or
killed or to go through life with the psychological
morbidity following an improperly treated combat
stress reaction. Would this patient have been better
served by allowing him to be medically evacuated
or to have been counseled to seek administrative
return from the theater? Is it better to undergo a
court martial and to be punished judicially (recognizing that he would be very unlikely to receive the
death penalty) but to be physically intact and able
to go about his life. It is truly difficult, if not impossible to generalize these decisions, but rather it is
better to attempt to elucidate the principles and
identify the morally relevant criteria for decision
making.
“Preserve the Fighting Strength”
In the previous edition of the Army’s medical
doctrinal manual, FM 8-55,10 Planning for Health Service Support, the return of soldiers to duty was given
high priority (Exhibit 13-1). This is congruent with
the AMEDD (Army Medical Department) motto,
“Preserve the Fighting Strength,” especially if the
primary role of a physician is interpreted as supporting the command, possibly at the expense of
the individual patient. However, in the most recent
edition of FM (Field Manual) 8-55,11 medical battlefield rules are presented (Exhibit 13-2). In this
schema, return to duty is in last place. Of greater
importance are keeping a medical presence with the
soldier, keeping the command healthy, and saving
lives. Even providing “state of the art care” is
ranked above returning soldiers to duty.
This shift in priorities places the needs of the individual soldier ahead of the duties to the command. It
must be noted, however, that the 1994 version of
FM 8-55 indicates that this listing of priorities is
provided in the context of assisting physicians when
priorities are in conflict, specifically in the realm of
designing and coordinating health service support
(HSS) operations. Although this ranking is, perhaps,
conducive to a more comfortable position for many
physicians, it does somewhat blur the role-specific
duty of the military physician to the command and
to the overall mission as discussed by Howe in
Chapter 12.
Informed Consent
On the battlefield, it is unlikely that truly informed consent can be obtained. The model for the
soldier before he is wounded is certainly not one of
informed consent, which could be summarized as:
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
375
EXHIBIT 13-1
RETURN-TO-DUTY CONSIDERATIONS DURING THE COLD WAR
The 1985 edition of Army Field Manual 8-55, Planning for Health Service Support, discussed the battlefield scenarios expected in a conflict with the former Soviet Union. The following excerpts are provided to give the
reader a sense of the climate at that time for medical service providers.
PREFACE
This manual provides guidance to health service support (HSS) planners at all levels within
a theater of operations (TO). It presents the basic steps associated with planning: principles
of planning, the staff estimate process, and base development. It includes rates and experience factors used in planning. The manual then addresses planning for HSS centered around
nine essential functions. The nine functions are evacuation; hospitalization; health service
logistics; medical laboratory services; blood management; dental services; veterinary services;
preventive medicine services; and command, control, and communications. Using this process will insure a complete and coordinated HSS plan. This plan will ultimately result in the
effective delivery of health care and the efficient use of scarce resources.
* * * * *
Section I. THE AIRLAND BATTLE CONCEPT
1. 1.
General
The Army’s basic concept is AirLand Battle.…It emphasizes success on the modern battlefield centered around four basic tenets: initiative, depth, agility, and synchronization. These
tenets will apply wherever we face an echeloned force built on the Soviet model or in other
military operations anywhere in the world.
* * * * *
1. 3.
General
Health Service support plays a key role in developing and maintaining combat power. This
fact was recognized by Major Jonathan Letterman, Surgeon of the Army of the Potomac during the Civil War. He noted:
“A corps of Medical officers was not established solely for the purpose of
attending the wounded and sick; … the labors of medical officers cover a
more extended field. The leading idea, which should be constantly kept in
view, is to strengthen the hands of the Commanding General by keeping his
army in the most vigorous health, thus rendering it, in the highest degree,
efficient for enduring fatigue and privation [sic], and for fighting. In this
view, the duties of such a corps are of vital importance to the success of any
army, and commanders seldom appreciate the full effect of their proper
fulfilment [sic].”
1. 4.
Planning for HSS
In the AirLand Battle, the extended battlefield stretches HSS capability to the maximum. It
presents an unprecedented challenge to the health service support planner as well as to the
tactical commander who is charged with fighting the battle. While the responsibility for what
is done and what is not done is the commander’s alone, he must rely on his staff and his
subordinate commanders to execute his decisions. He must also look to his HSS planners and
medical commanders to anticipate his plans and decisions so that they may continue to sustain his command in the absence of orders and communications....
* * * * *
1. 5
FOCUS OF HEALTH SERVICE SUPPORT
As previously stated, the AirLand Battle offers significant challenges to the tactical commander
and the health service support planner. As the battlefield becomes increasingly lethal, sus(Exhibit 13-1 continues)
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
376
You are requested to take that hill. If you do, you
will subject yourself to enemy machine gun fire.
You may be killed or wounded. If you do not charge
that hill, you may be subjected to the ridicule of
your comrades and may even be tried under military law and possibly sentenced to death.
Of course this isn’t the appropriate time or the place
for informed consent. The soldier is ordered to “take
that hill,” and that is that.
The physician, as well, will not be able to comply with the ideal of informed consent. For truly
informed consent to occur, the patient must be free
of coercion, be capable of understanding the courses
of action available, and be free to act on the
decision. 12(p143) In combat there are forces that are
coercive to the patient in making his decision, including limited supplies, limited personnel for providing care, limited evacuation assets, and the possibility of enemy action. The patient will suffer from
all the same difficulties in understanding the
courses of action as do civilian patients in an elective setting, but will have the additional difficulties seen in any emergency situation compounded
by the exigencies of combat. In addition, he will
very possibly not be freely able to act on his request.
It truly may not be available to him. If the patient
requests evacuation and no assets are available, or
if supplying them would compromise the mission,
this course of action is not really available to him.
If the patient desires a surgical operation in an environment that is not potentially contaminated, has
no chance of enemy action during the procedure,
and a guarantee that he will not be moved during
his convalescence, this will also be unavailable to
him. Again, the best to hope for is that there will be
some semblance of informed consent offered to the
wounded, but it will be clearly far less than that
expected in the civilian sector, or in the military
during peacetime.
Beneficence for the Soldier in Combat
Beneficence for the individual is a hallmark of
care in the civilian arena. 12(p260) It generally translates into the military arena, although it may have
to be altered due to circumstances on the battlefield.
Although the desired action might be to do everything possible for the individual patient, including
protecting him from any potential harm, this may
not be possible in many situations. On the battlefield, it is difficult to determine exactly what is the
beneficent action. Sometimes the action that seems
most likely to help the patient may, on further reflection (or in retrospect), be exactly the worst decision for him. Sometimes the patient is better off
with his unit, even if this may place him at further
risk for injury. There are significant benefits from
the unit cohesiveness and support he may derive
from his comrades.
It is also possible that the soldier may not request
appropriate care (or may choose inappropriate care)
based on his impression that this may improve his
chances of being removed from the dangerous situation. In a case such as this, there may be justification for an increased amount of paternalism, particularly if the requested course will limit the
soldier’s combat effectiveness. The decision to treat
the soldier, potentially against his wishes, is one that
concerns all physicians in uniform. However, it
should rarely arise except in combat or in situations
requiring advance preparation for combat such as
the current anthrax and smallpox vaccination programs. Although the option to treat without consent is available to the military physician through
the chain of command,13 it is not usually exercised.
The reasons for this option being infrequently exercised are explored more fully in Chapter 27, A
Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine. In peacetime
military medical care, the paradigm is essentially
that of the civilian model during normal operation,
taining the health of the fighting forces, long a role of the US Army Medical Department,
becomes a critical factor in the success or failure of friendly forces. Proper planning enhances
the capability of medical units to provide effective HSS and ultimately increases the chances
for survival of the soldier on the battlefield. Forward support describes the character that
health service support must assume. Thus, the focus of the thrust of HSS is to maximize the
return-to-duty rate to conserve the human component of the combat commander’s weapons
system.
Source: US Department of the Army. Planning for Health Service Support. Washington, DC: DA; 15 February 1985. Field
Manual 8-55: 1-1–1-5.
Exhibit 13-1 continued
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
377
EXHIBIT 13-2
MEDICAL BATTLEFIELD RULES
The 1994 edition of Army Field Manual (FM) 8-55, Planning for Health Service Support, explains the medical
battlefield rules, and reflects the impact of the breakup of the former Soviet Union. The United States is the
sole remaining superpower in a world in which, at least for the foreseeable future, its military will more likely
deploy to “operations other than war,” rather than total combat. The 1994 edition of FM 8-55 provides additional guidance to help the military medical professional resolve system conflicts when they arise. This allows
the professional a greater exercise of autonomy than seen in previous editions of this FM.
PREFACE
This manual provides guidance to health service support (HHS) planners at all echelons of care within a
theater of operations (TO). It contains a digest of the accepted principles and procedures pertaining to
HSS planning. Information in this publication is applicable across the spectrum of military operations. It
is compatible with the Army’s combat service support (CSS) doctrine.
. . . .
1. 1.
The Army’s Keystone Doctrine
Field Manual 100-5, the Army’s keystone doctrinal manual, describes how the Army thinks about the
conduct of operations. It is a condensed expression of the Army’s participation in diverse environments
in terms of what the forces does in operations other than war (OOTW) and how the Army conducts war.
1. 2.
Range of Military Operations
a.
The US seeks to achieve its strategic aims in three diverse environments.
(1)
Peacetime. During peacetime, the US attempts to influence world events through those actions
which routinely occur between nations.…
(2)
Conflict. Conflict is characterized by confrontation and the need to engage in hostilities short
of war to secure strategic objectives. Although the American people, our government, and the
US Army prefer peace, hostile forces may seek to provoke a crisis or otherwise defeat our
purpose of deterring war by creating a conflict. At the point where diplomatic influence alone
fails to resolve the conflict, persuasion may be required, and the US could enter a more intense environment in which it uses the military to pursue its aim.
NOTE
The Army classifies its activities during peacetime and conflict as OOTW.
(3)
War. The most violent and high-risk environment is that of war, with its associated
combat operations.
. . . .
1-4.
Need for a Health Service Support System
a.
The dynamics of our global responsibilities require a HSS system that is flexible to support the
diversity of operations.
b.
Providing comprehensive HSS to Army operations requires continuous planning and synchronization of a fully integrated and cohesive HSS system. The system must be responsive and effective
across the full range of possible operations. Medical unit commanders and HSS planners must
be proactive in changing situations, applying the medical battlefield rules as the situation requires.
1-5.
Medical Battlefield Rules:
a.
The Health Service Support (HSS) planner and operator applies the following rules, in order of
precedence, when priorities are in conflict:
(1)
Maintain medical presence with the soldier.
(2)
Maintain the health of the command.
(3)
Save lives.
(Exhibit 13-2 continues)
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
378
in that both strive to return the patient to full health.
Patients are involved in their own care decisions
and their wishes are typically respected. If a patient
decision, however, will prevent the soldier from
continuing his military service, he is informed of
this. The patient will typically then have the option
of deciding what course his medical care will take
and if this would preclude further military service,
the soldier may be administratively separated from
the military. 14 In combat, however, this decision may
rest on factors outside the control of the patient or
even of the physician. There are policies or procedures that will be enforced over their wishes. This
is based on federal statutes, including USC (United
States Code) 10,15 in which the Secretary of the Army
has the option to direct medical treatment of soldiers, without their consent if necessary. These statutes were generated by the requirements society
legitimately places on those in the military, who are
charged with protecting the society and its founding principles as outlined in the US Constitution.
An example of this occurred during the Persian
Gulf War when US servicemembers were directed to
take pyridostigmine bromide (PB) as a pretreatment
against nerve agent exposure. This decision was made
based upon intelligence information that the threat
of nerve agent use by Iraq was very high and experimental evidence that there was benefit to individuals
by reversibly binding the acetylcholinesterase receptors by PB, rather than irreversibly binding by
nerve agent. It was recognized that there could be
side effects to PB and that there may be soldiers who
would “autonomously” decide to not take PB, but the
decision was made both from an individual beneficence position (“The military has a duty to take all
available reasonable actions to protect its members.”)
as well as from a mission accomplishment position
(“If this soldier becomes a chemical casualty, he, and
potentially other soldiers caring for him, will become
ineffective for combat.”). A nonmedical analogy is that
of ordering soldiers to wear chemical protective overgarments and Kevlar body armor, even in hot environments with the concomitant risk of heat injury, to
help protect them from true or perceived harm. The
individual soldier does not have autonomy to make
decisions about the battle uniform and may not have
autonomy in this case (regarding taking PB) as well.
Enforced Treatment for Individual Soldiers
In deciding in favor of enforced treatment for
soldiers, it is important to have an ethical basis for
one’s decision. Factors that have moral weight include beneficence to the individual soldier, duties
to the other soldiers in the unit, duties to the command, and duties to society. Arguments against
paternalistic treatment of soldiers would include
attempts to preserve the autonomy of the soldier,
concerns for abuses of the practice, questions of the
intent, and potential violations of international law.
(4)
Clear the battlefield.
(5)
Provide state-of-the-art care.
(6)
Return soldiers to duty as early as possible.
b.
These rules are intended to guide the HSS planner to resolve system conflicts encountered in
designing and coordinating HSS operations. Although medical personnel seek always to provide the full scope of HSS in the best manner possible, during every combat operation there are
inherent possibilities of conflicting support requirements. The planner or operator applies these
rules to ensure that the conflicts of HSS are resolved appropriately.
. . . .
d.
By way of illustration, consider a rapid assault of short duration where the composition of the
task force precludes deployment of a definitive medical care facility. A medical support conflict
now arises between supporting the commander’s intent and providing optimal care to the soldiers. The conflict can be resolved appropriately by applying the battlefield rules. Planners must
increase the medical presence with the soldiers to resuscitate casualties and maintain stabilization pending evacuation. Greater reliance on forward medical presence compensates for the inability to employ hospitals near the battlefield, supports the commanders’ intent, and still provides the patient with state-of-the-art medical care within the limitations imposed by the battlefield. The battlefield rules are thereby used as a means of conflict resolution.
Source: US Department of the Army. Planning for Health Service Support. Washington, DC: DA; 9 September 1994. Field
Manual 8-55: 1-1–1-3.
Exhibit 13-2 continued
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
379
Arguments for Enforced Treatment
In examining beneficence, which at least at the
surface seems to be in conflict with autonomy, it is
important to look carefully at obligations implied
to the individual. When an individual enters the
military (currently as a volunteer because there is
no draft in effect) the military makes an implicit
promise to give the soldier the best medical support this country is able to provide. This promise is
made with the understanding that it is extremely
important for soldiers to feel they are able to risk
injury in the course of their duties. Soldiers fear
injury and disability much more than they fear
death, an outcome toward which they typically
have a fatalistic attitude. 16 If the military has made
an implicit promise that the best care is available,
does this automatically lead to the assumption that
this care should universally be applied in all situations to all soldiers? Arguments in favor of this presumption would, of necessity, be based on the paternalistic notion that the military knows what is
best for all individuals. This is not a foreign concept to those in the armed forces because there are
many examples seen in the daily lives of soldiers
(eg, mandatory changes of socks, mandatory canteen checks, and vaccinations prior to deployment).
It is a basic tenet among line officers that there are
some things that the command must (and will) decide for everyone within the command. This is not
only perceived to be necessary for preserving the
fighting strength of the personnel within the command to allow for the mission to be accomplished,
but is also perceived as the obligation of the command to the well-being of its people. The use of
experts in various areas to allow the commander to
make decisions for his entire command and the hierarchical structure of the military foster this line
of reasoning. It may be necessary for the command
to maintain overall control of these decisions and
for the physician, as a member of the command
structure, to treat soldiers involuntarily.
The military also has a very strong obligation to
the other members in the unit. If one individual can
refuse treatment, and in so doing increases his
chances of becoming a casualty, this has serious
implications on the other members within that unit.
They would be required to assist in his evacuation,
if he is injured or becomes ill, or in the recovery of
his body, if he is killed. There is certainly a risk involved in these activities as other soldiers may be
injured or killed attempting to assist a fallen comrade. It is also apparent that if the soldier is incapacitated and unable to perform his portion of the
mission, his duties will fall to some other member
of the unit. If his role in the operation is not performed, the safety of the individuals on his right or
left is compromised. The likelihood of their becoming casualties is increased. This can have a snowballing effect on the well-being of the entire unit.
This strongly favors enforced treatment.
There is also a duty to the command, both on the
part of the individual soldier as well as on the physician. On the part of the soldier, he has sworn an
oath to obey the lawful orders of those in positions
over him, as has the physician,17 and thereby he is
required to submit to the decisions of his commander. The physician, as well, through his oath of
office18 and commission19 has volunteered his art
and craft to support those in command. This is not
a total acceptance of any and all orders14 but there
are factors involved in the decision to issue the order of which the physician may not be fully aware.
(See Chapter 12 for a further discussion of this
topic.) These factors may influence the commander
in his decision to require treatment for the troops
in his units. Because the physician is involved in
advising the commander in medical matters, he is
more likely to be aware of some of these issues and
therefore more likely to understand the decision
process. In most cases the commander makes decisions that result in enhancing the overall welfare of
his troops. If there is serious concern over the correct medical facts in the order, the physician should
attempt to clarify the rationale for the order and
discuss the medical facts, as he interprets them, with
the commander and attempt to resolve any differences. 20 In an extreme situation, the physician may
need to request to be relieved of his duties and request court-martial if he firmly believes the course
of action chosen by the commander is illegal or
morally wrong. 21 This concept is developed more
fully in Chapter 27, A Proposed Ethic for Military
Medicine.
As a member of the overall society, the physician also has a responsibility. In war, particularly
in a war whose outcome is uncertain, a duty to society would support the concept of “preserve the
fighting strength” and would allow enforced treatment of soldiers. If the soldier refuses a treatment
and thereby potentially is incapable of completing
his mission, it may be in society’s interest to have
the treatment involuntarily given to the soldier. This
may cause significant distress in the physician who
is told to administer the treatment forcibly to the
soldier. Again, it is best to anticipate this tension
and examine these issues prior to the actual situation arising.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
380
Arguments Against Enforced Treatment
Alternatively, refusing to administer the treatment
may be ethically defended on those grounds previously stated. The vulnerable soldier has already
given up so much of his autonomy that it may seem
unconscionable to remove this last amount. It is
antithetical to respecting his dignity as a person to
forcibly treat him. It really doesn’t matter what motives the soldier has in refusing—it still is onerous
to forcefully administer the treatment. Irrespective of
other actions that can be taken against the soldier’s
permission, it is somehow different when one begins talking about medicine. Once a soldier becomes
a patient, his status changes in many ways. Thus
he has a different claim upon the system. Most oaths
for physicians also note that persons as patients will
not be used as means to another’s end. In effect most
arguments for enforcing treatment are furthering
other’s goals at the risk to or expense of the patient.
There is also a concern over generalizing this relatively limited use of a policy into one that has great
potential for abuse. If it is widely accepted that the
commander (or the physician acting for the commander) has the ability to forcibly treat any patient
presenting for care, this increases the already mildly
coercive environment soldiers exist within and
could easily lead to the patient being forced to submit to treatment that won’t clearly help him (or may
in fact harm him). If this is the policy, it is also possible that the patient will expect the physician to
order the treatment, no matter what the patient
wants. Therefore the perception of the patient is that
he really doesn’t have any choice anyway. This
would clearly lead to a fractured physician–patient
relationship and a failure of any possible informed
consent in military medical practice.
There could be an unrecognized, or even recognized, desire on the part of the physician to impose
unproved or experimental treatment on the patient.
The motive could be a scientific desire to advance
medicine while somewhat circumventing the normal controls on scientific experimentation. It could,
however, be more sinister and approach the travesties of medical care and experimentation the Nazi
physicians forced on their victims. 22 The clear concern is that such a policy needs to be carefully examined and reviewed prospectively. Parenthetically, this issue needs to be evaluated for enemy
prisoners of war (EPWs). Experimentation upon
prisoners is clearly prohibited under Article 13 of
the Geneva Conventions regarding prisoners of war,
which states that “no prisoner of war may be subjected to physical mutilation or to medical or scientific experiments of any kind which are not justified by the medical, dental or hospital treatment of
the prisoner concerned and carried out in his interest.”23 However, there is a difference between experimentation and treatment. Treatment given to
captured soldiers must be able to be differentiated
from experiments. It would seem that any treatment
involuntarily given to troops should also be able to
be given without questions of experimentation to
captured soldiers based on the principle of justice.
If the treatment is being given to US soldiers to enable them to continue the mission and the EPW refuses this treatment, it is clear that this decision
should be respected, but that the treatment should
not be withheld from the prisoner if it is requested.
If, on the other hand, the treatment is being given
for clear medical indications, the refusal by the EPW
seems more problematic, but should probably be
respected based on autonomy considerations alone.
The potential for abuse of captives and memories
of German and Japanese experiments on POWs are
strong arguments for allowing EPWs to exercise
decision making wherever possible, particularly in
medical decisions.
BATTLEFIELD TRIAGE
Battlefield triage has been described as “the infamous process” that forces a physician to make
decisions not to treat patients whom he judges to
have little chance of recovery. 24 Under certain conditions this may be true, however, the triage concept does not have a totally ignoble past. The word
comes from the French verb trier, meaning “to sort.”
Initially it was used to categorize merchandise such
as coffee or wool. During Napoleon’s campaigns his
chief surgeon, Baron Dominique Jean Larrey, sorted
the casualties and consistently began treating the
most seriously wounded first, “without regard to
rank or distinction.”25
The Concept of Triage
Triage is defined as the “screening and classification of wounded, sick, or injured patients during
war or another disaster to determine priority needs
and thereby ensure the most efficient use of medical
and surgical manpower, equipment, and facilities”26
or “a system used to allocate a scarce commodity,
[such] as food, only to those capable of deriving the
greatest benefit from it.”26 The Emergency War Surgery
handbook defines triage as “the evaluation and classification of casualties for purposes of treatment and
evacuation. It is based on the principle of accomMedical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
381
plishing the greatest good for the greatest number
of wounded and injured men in the special circumstances of warfare at a particular time.…Sorting also
involves the establishment of priorities for treatment and evacuation.”27(p181)
Triage actually occurs in all aspects of medicine,
whether one is operating in a mass casualty situation or not. In practice, one “triages” patients based
on the urgency of their complaints, by the number
of appointments available, or by the availability of
specialty care. In a nonaustere environment, which
is seen in most emergency rooms today, there is a
triage desk where patients are first checked in. After sorting patients and symptoms, the most critically ill will be cared for first. This patient-centered
approach to triage has been the model for many
years. However, it is becoming increasingly more
common for issues involving allocation of scarce
resources to arise in civilian medicine and for triage decisions to be based on limited resources. Although this may not approach the difficulties seen
on the battlefield, there are significant moral tensions developing. As resources become more and
more scarce (limitations based on financial decisions), these problems will assume a greater role in
the future. Mass casualty situations occur in the civilian sector as well and may require institution of
some other prioritization procedure during times
of limited resources.
On the battlefield, triage based on the most critically injured being treated first holds when there is
no overwhelming demand for facilities. This would
require full resupply capabilities and the expectation that there would be no likelihood of overwhelming numbers of casualties in the near future.
These conditions may be impossible to guarantee
on the battlefield and a more austere environment
triage scheme may need to be employed.
Establishing and Maintaining Prioritization of
Treatment
The sorting of patients, as delineated in Emergency War Surgery, assigns them into five groups in
decreasing order of medical urgency27(pp184–186):
(1)
urgent: require immediate intervention if
death is to be prevented;
(2)
immediate: require procedures of moderately short duration to stabilize severe, lifethreatening wounds;
(3)
delayed: require operative intervention but
can tolerate delay without compromising
successful outcome;
(4)
minimal (or ambulatory): require minimal
surgical attention no more than cleansing,
local anesthetic for debridement, and
dressings. These are the most common injuries and include minor lacerations, minimal
burns, and small soft tissue injuries; and
(5)
expectant: wounds are so extensive that
even if this patient were the sole casualty,
his survival is still unlikely.
Exhibit 13-3 discusses these five groupings in
greater detail.
Models of Triage
I propose that there are actually three basic models of triage used, depending on the situation and
circumstances. The previously described model is
the one seen in nonaustere conditions. When time,
personnel, equipment, or supplies are significantly
diminished, such that there are true limitations in
resources, the second model for more austere conditions will need to be implemented. The third model
will involve extreme conditions and decisions that
would be very difficult under normal circumstances; it will rarely need to be implemented.
Under the first, or nonaustere conditions model,
the most seriously injured patients would be treated
first. No patients would be declared expectant, at
least until some significant attempt at resuscitation
had occurred. It is clear that some patients may have
overwhelming injuries and will die whatever the
level of support and resuscitation. Indeed, this
could be the case in an American civilian trauma
center today. For these patients, once this is evident,
efforts could be recognized as futile and care could
be withdrawn or withheld, just as is done in civilian situations. This is the model that is most frequently seen and that occurred throughout the Persian Gulf War for most units, including American
hospitals for Iraqi POWs.
The second model of triage, that seen in austere
conditions, could be viewed as an attempt to save
as many lives as possible. In so doing, some patients
will die who otherwise could have lived had adequate resources been available. This decision
would potentially be quite difficult, however, it has
certain parallels in the civilian sector and is analogous to allocation decisions that are becoming much
more frequent. Under this model, those patients
most likely to benefit from treatment would be
treated first, even if an individual patient may die
who otherwise would have benefited from intervention. Some of these patients who died would have
been declared expectant; others may have been too
complicated to respond quickly to treatment. This
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
382
EXHIBIT 13-3
TRIAGE: ESTABLISHING PRIORITIES OF TREATMENT
Emergency War Surgery, a NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) handbook, offers the following
guidance concerning the priorities of treatment for battlefield casualties:
In order to cope effectively and efficiently with large numbers of battle casualties that present almost
simultaneously, the principles of triage, or the sorting and assignment of treatment priorities to various
categories of wounded, must be understood, universally accepted, and routinely practiced throughout
all echelons of collection, evacuation, and definitive treatment.…Not uncommonly, the most gravely
injured are the first to be evacuated from the collection points. They will also be the first to arrive at the
definitive care facility. The receiving surgeon (triage officer) must guard against overcommitting his
resources to those first arrivals prior to establishing a perspective of the total number and types of casualties still to be received. It is easier to assign priorities of care to individual casualties if the medical
officer has a feel for the usual anatomical distribution of war wounds. Survivors present with a reasonably consistent pattern of wound distribution….With experience, the forward surgeon comes to recognize this recurring pattern and the relatively consistent distribution of wound types and location in
groups of battle casualties….Application of the following criteria makes the receipt, triage, and treatment of large numbers of simultaneously arriving casualties more manageable, while at the same time
minimizing the confusion and calamity that otherwise could prevail.
Urgent: This group requires urgent intervention if death is to be prevented. This category includes those
with asphyxia, respiratory obstruction from mechanical causes, sucking chest wounds, tension pneumothorax, maxillofacial wounds with asphyxia or where asphyxia is likely to develop, exsanguinating
internal hemorrhage unresponsive to vigorous volume replacement, most cardiac injuries, and CNS [central nervous system] wounds with deteriorating neurological status.
Therapeutic interventions range from tracheal intubation, placement of chest tubes, and rapid volume
replacement to urgent laparotomy, thoracotomy, or craniotomy. Shock caused by major internal hemorrhage
will, in these circumstances, require urgent operative intervention to control exsanguinating hemorrhage.
If the initial resuscitative interventions are successful and some degree of stability is achieved, the urgent casualty may occasionally revert to a lower priority. The hopelessly wounded and those with many
life-threatening wounds, who require extraordinary efforts, should not be included in this category.
Immediate: Casualties in this category present with severe, life-threatening wounds that require procedures of moderately short duration. Casualties within this group have a high likelihood of survival.
They tend to remain temporarily stable while undergoing replacement therapy and methodical evaluation. The key word is temporarily. Examples of the immediate category are: unstable chest and abdominal wounds, inaccessible vascular wounds with limb ischemia, incomplete amputations, open fractures
of long bones, white phosphorous burns, and second- or third-degree burns of 15–40% or more of total
body surface.
Delayed: Casualties in the delayed category can tolerate delay prior to operative intervention without
unduly compromising the likelihood of a successful outcome. When medical resources are overwhelmed,
individuals in this category are held until the urgent and immediate cases are cared for. Examples include stable abdominal wounds with probable visceral injury, but without significant hemorrhage. These
cases may go unoperated for eight or ten hours, after which there is a direct relationship between the
time lapse and the advent of complications. Other examples include soft tissue wounds requiring debridement, maxillofacial wounds without airway compromise, vascular injuries without adequate collateral circulation, genitourinary tract disruption, fractures requiring operative manipulation, debridement
and external fixation, and most eye and CNS injuries.
Minimal or Ambulatory: This category is comprised of casualties with wounds that are so superficial
that they require no more than cleansing, minimal debridement under local anesthesia, tetanus toxoid,
and first-aid-type dressings. They must be rapidly directed away from the triage area to uncongested
areas where first aid and non-specialty medical personnel are available. Examples include burns of less
than 15% total body surface area, with the exception of those involving the face, hands, or genitalia.
Other examples include upper extremity fractures, sprains, abrasions, early phases of symptomatic but
unquantified radiation exposure, suspicion of blast injury (perforated tympanic membranes), and behavioral disorders or other obvious psychiatric disturbances.
(Exhibit 13-3 continues)
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
383
model fits in a utilitarian analysis in that the good
for the whole is being maximized, but at the expense
of individuals. An example of this model in practice occurred during mass casualty situations in
Vietnam where resources were not available to treat
all patients at one time and with maximal effect.
The third model of triage, that seen in extreme
conditions, may arise on the battlefield, in which
the battle is going against US troops with a great
chance that the line units will not have enough
manpower to prevail against the enemy. This may
require treating patients with less severe injuries
first to preserve a diminishing fighting force. Under this model, patients with non–life-threatening
injuries that, if treated, would not prevent the soldier from going back to battle, would be treated
first. This has rarely been used in the American
military but was the accepted model for triage in
the German army during World War II. 28 An example from United States history is the use of penicillin in North Africa during World War II. 29 The
decision was made to treat soldiers with venereal
disease with the limited supplies of penicillin available rather than using it in patients with battle
wounds, even if the injured patients might die without it. The reasons given were, indeed, the ability
to return the soldiers with venereal disease to the
front lines to continue to fight, while those with
battle wounds would be unable to return, even if
given the penicillin.
Examining the Extreme Conditions Model
The extreme condition model contradicts most
decisions medical personnel make, and is a classic
example of the conflict in dual agency, or duties to
both the patient and the command. Obviously, the
command has a great interest in having those minimally wounded soldiers back on the line, and may
well support this scheme of triage, but many physicians would find this to be difficult and contrary
to what one would do normally.
Respecting the Autonomy of the Soldier
The individual patient who is severely injured
may not desire his lower priority of treatment because it will necessitate his waiting for treatment
while minimally injured patients are treated (and
may significantly increase his chances of dying).
Conversely, the minimally injured patient may not
want to be treated before his severely injured buddy
because the buddy may die if not treated promptly.
He may also recognize that the faster he is treated,
Expectant: Casualties in the expectant category have wounds that are so extensive that even if they were
the sole casualty and had the benefit of optimal medical resource application, their survival still would
be very unlikely. During a mass casualty situation, this sort of casualty would require an unjustifiable
expenditure of limited resources, resources that are more wisely applied to several other more salvageable individuals. To categorize a soldier to this category requires a resolve that comes only with prior
experience in futile surgery that ties up operating rooms and personnel while other more salvageable
casualties wait, deteriorate, or even die. The expectant casualties should be separated from the view of
other casualties; however, they should not be abandoned. Above all, one attempts to make them comfortable
by whatever means necessary and provides attendance by a minimal but competent staff. Examples:
unresponsive patients with penetrating head wounds, high spinal cord injuries, mutilating explosive
wounds involving multiple anatomical sites and organs, second- and third-degree burns in excess of
60% total body surface area, convulsions and vomiting within twenty-four hours of radiation exposure,
profound shock with multiple injuries, and agonal respiration. Exposure to radiation or biologic and
chemical agents when presenting in conjunction with conventional injuries will alter the above categorization. The degree to which such agents compound the prognosis is somewhat variable and difficult to
specifically apply to a mass casualty situation. A safe practice is to classify the exposed casualty at the
lowest priority in his category. It has been stated that those in the immediate category with radiation
exposure estimated to be 400 rads be moved to the delayed group, and those with greater than 400 rads
be placed in the expectant category. Those with convulsions or vomiting in the first 24-hours are not
likely to survive even in the absence of other injuries. Mass casualty situations are highly probable when
troops have been exposed to radiation or chemical or biological agents. There must be areas set aside
within the hospital to safely isolate these types of patients, and special procedures must be established
to safeguard the attending medical personnel.
Source: Bowen TE, Bellamy RF. Emergency War Surgery. Second United States Revision of The Emergency War Surgery NATO
Handbook, Washington, DC: US Department of Defense; 1988: 184–186.
Exhibit 13-3 continued
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
384
the sooner he will return to the front where he may
be more seriously injured, or killed. There could be
tremendous pressures on the person performing
triage to avoid making these decisions. The defense
of the decision to treat the minimally wounded first
could be made on the basis of a utilitarian approach.
Under this analysis, the basic tenet of doing the
“greatest good for the greatest number” would allow the decision to be made, not for the benefit of
the individual patient, but rather for the good of
the unit, the army, or the country. If by not returning the minimally wounded patient to duty, the unit
is overrun, there are more casualties generated, the
army is defeated, or the war is prolonged (or even
lost), thereby causing great suffering in the country, then a strong argument is made for choosing to
treat the minimally injured patient.
Conversely, the argument can be made that if
these choices are consistently made, the unit will
come to know that if one is wounded severely and
requires maximum care it would not be given. This
can affect the desire to fight or to place oneself at
risk. The excellent medical care US troops receive
during combat is a “force multiplier.”30 Consistently
making triage decisions using the extreme conditions model may well be considered a “force divider,” not only by diminishing the “will to fight”
but also by possibly causing “competition” for
medical care. One soldier may consider the less injured soldier in the next space as the only thing
standing between himself and death. This is likely
to destroy unit cohesiveness.
Caring for Noncombatant Casualties
It is also clear that enemy prisoners of war and
civilian casualties would not receive priority care
under this triage model. This is in violation of Article 12 of the Geneva Conventions, which states
that “[o]nly urgent medical reasons will authorize
priority in the order of treatment to be administered.”3 By invoking the extreme conditions model,
the healthcare professional may be violating one of
the most basic medical premises, which is that once
injured and captured, the enemy is no longer a combatant but is instead entitled to the same basic human respect and concern for his medical needs as
US military personnel.
Understanding Military Doctrine
US Army doctrine provides guidance for the
medical professional facing varying battlefield scenarios. The rules of battlefield medicine as seen in
Exhibit 13-2 are ranked in order of precedence. “Return to duty” considerations are the last priority.
However, return to duty is still a major ethical dilemma for the medical professional on the battlefield and is difficult, if not impossible, to resolve
using generalities. The extreme conditions model
of triage has never been encountered in the modern US Army. Even during mass casualty situations
in Vietnam triage first selected those most likely to
be benefited by rapid treatment rather than selecting those most able to return to the front. Most
medical professionals probably would have great
difficulty implementing an extreme condition triage model. However, just because it is difficult
doesn’t mitigate against preparing for such an
implementation. The scenario of overwhelming
mass casualties in the face of an advancing enemy
force deserves study and analysis by individual
medical professionals before they are actually in the
unenviable situation of having to decide what to do.
EUTHANASIA ON THE BATTLEFIELD
Physician-assisted dying is a major issue currently
being discussed in the civilian sector. Initiatives to
legalize physician aid in dying were narrowly defeated in Washington state as well as in California; it
passed by a narrow margin in Oregon in 1994. This
law survived challenges in court as well as a repeat
referendum in 1997 after the Oregon Medical Association withdrew its support for it. Attempts to pass
referenda supporting physician aid in dying have
since failed in Michigan, Maine, and in other states,
leaving Oregon as the only state permitting physicianassisted suicide. Attempts to overturn state laws prohibiting physician-assisted suicide have failed in the
US Supreme Court in 1997 and in several state supreme courts, including Alaska, Colorado, and
Florida. Public opinion concerning this issue varies,
often apparently depending on the actual wording of
the survey, but seems to be pretty evenly divided. The
issue remains one of the most hotly debated in all arenas. The issue also exists within military medicine for
the same reasons as in the civilian sector, however,
the battlefield adds new dimensions and difficulties.
Understanding the Dynamics of the Battlefield:
The Swann Scenario
The following scenario, published by Dr. Steve
Swann in 1987 in Military Medicine,31 presents a
vivid picture of the ethical dilemmas facing the
military physician.
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
385
Case Study 13-1: A Hypothetical Scenario. Three
weeks ago US Naval forces in the Mediterranean
launched air and sea attacks against military installations
in Libya in response to increased terrorist activities known
to originate from Mu’ammar Quaddafi’s regime. This was
followed by the invasion of the 2nd Marine Division near
Tripoli. This military action was applauded by Israel but
condemned by most NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] allies and, as expected, by the Arab world and
communist block nations. US forces suffered few losses
and easily secured the country with complete destruction
of the Libyan Army. In retaliation, certain Arab countries
attacked US forces in Libya and simultaneously invaded
Israel. US Naval forces suffered minimal losses from the
Soviet-supplied navies and air forces of these nations,
and although the Marines have sustained moderate casualties, they still control the battlefield.
One week following the opening of hostilities in North
Africa, Warsaw Pact Nations began unscheduled, largescale “Training Exercises” near the East-West German
border. Six days ago these units crossed into the Federal
Republic of Germany and attacked NATO units to force a
US withdrawal from Libya. The US refused, and combat
in both regions has continued to escalate.
As a surgeon in a clearing station in direct support of
the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment defending the Fulda
gap [a geographically strategic point for invasion along
the border between East and West Germany], I have seen
many casualties of all types. I knew that modern warfare
would create great numbers of wounded and cause massive destruction, but I had no idea it would be this terrible. Our unit has taken 65% losses. Despite heroic actions, we continue to be forced back 30 to 60 km each
day, but short of the Soviet doctrinal 100 km daily advance [Soviet doctrine indicating that to maximize disarray in the enemy’s troops, Soviet forces should propel
themselves 100 km a day, shocking, overpowering, and
demoralizing the enemy with the rapid advance]. The 85th
Guards Motorized Rifle Division oppose us, and their lines
are 8 km away. They are expected to be at this location
in 45 minutes. Intelligence reports that all severely
wounded prisoners are being executed [by the Russians
as they advance], for the Russians do not want to slow
their attack to deal with the problem of caring for or transporting them.
In my clearing station I have no capability to hold patients or transport them with me. I can only triage, initially
resuscitate, and then evacuate with higher command assets. At the present time we have 32 wounded, 17 of which
are categorized as expectant. They include a German
civilian with abdominal evisceration who is pleading to
die, two unresponsive soldiers with extensive head
wounds, two soldiers with 80-90% total body burns from
chemical contamination, eight soldiers who have received
a dosimeter-documented 825 rads after unknowingly
crossing a nuclear-contaminated area and who continue
to vomit and pass diarrheal stools, and a four-man tank
crew all of whom received between 60 and 90% body
surface area, full thickness burns after the fuel cell of their
M60A3 exploded when hit with a Sagger anti-tank missile. The screams of the wounded could easily expose
our position to the attacking Soviet forces or to the Russian commando units known to be operating behind our
lines.
The 3rd Armored Division, whom we are screening,
will take 3 hours to get land evacuation to me. Air evacuation is not available since the Soviets have air superiority, and besides, we have already lost 80% of our helicopter assets [similar to Figure 13-3]. I lost 40% of my
men and equipment, including another physician, a pediatrician, [similar to Figure 13-4] when our convoy was
strafed by MiG-27’s 2 days ago. I have not been resupplied in 2 days, and I am running short of everything, especially morphine, bandages, and IV fluids. I have just
received orders to displace [to another location] in 15
minutes and be ready to accept new casualties from the
intensified fighting in 30 more.
Oh, Lord, there is nothing medically I can do to extend
the lives of these brave men. They are all doomed to die
and suffer immeasurably until they do so. Need I kill these
men? Should I take this merciful action so as not to postpone the unalterable?31
Comment: Although this scenario is outdated (it predated the demise of the Soviet Union) and the events did
not occur, today’s battlefield is nonetheless potentially one
of massive destruction with weapons that have the potential to generate astronomical numbers of casualties.
Thus, although the names of the conflicting forces and
locales would be different in a future scenario, the scenario itself remains all too possible and clearly presents
lessons to be learned.
Before attempting to answer the extremely difficult question with which this hypothetical scenario
ends, a brief study of the history of battlefield euthanasia may be helpful. By examining some documented situations, it is possible that similarities and
differences, as well as unifying themes may become
more clear.
Fig. 13-3. This medical evacuation helicopter crashed
during Operation Desert Storm in 1991. It is not known
whether this was due to hostile fire or accident.
FPO
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
386
A Brief History of Battlefield Euthanasia
Requests for battlefield euthanasia have, no
doubt, occurred on battlefields as long as there have
been battlefields. When men have taken up arms
against one another, for whatever reason, there have
always been those wounded who do not die immediately, but clearly cannot live for long, either because of their wounds or their circumstances. This
can generate the desire to hasten their inevitable
death, by both the wounded soldier as well as their
comrades. These situations have probably occurred
throughout history.
For instance, battlefield euthanasia requests are
documented in the Bible as far back as the time of
Abimelech (around 1100 BC) in the city of Thebes.
Abimelech was a Judge of Israel who had captured
Thebes but all the inhabitants had locked themselves inside a strong tower inside the city. He attempted to burn the tower and kill those inside, but
as he approached it to set it on fire, “a woman
dropped an upper millstone on his head and
cracked his skull” (Judges 9:53). 32(p346) He requested
that his armor bearer kill him because he did not
want history to record that he was killed by a
woman; the armor bearer acceded to his request.
A more famous request occurred in 1010 BC when
King Saul was wounded by the Philistines and
asked his armor bearer to kill him because Saul was
concerned about potential torture if he was captured. The armor bearer refused and Saul “took his
own sword and fell on it” (1 Samuel 31:4). 32(p419) The
armor bearer also committed suicide. An interesting aside is that later in the account, an Amalekite,
expecting to be rewarded by Saul’s enemy David,
claimed to have been the one who “killed [Saul],
because [he] knew that after he had fallen, he could
not survive“ (2 Samuel 1:10). 32(p419) David put the
Amalekite to death for having the temerity to even
contemplate harming Saul (the “Lord’s anointed”)
much less killing him.
Ambroise Pare describes another case of battlefield euthanasia. Pare was a French barber surgeon
who enlisted in the army of Francis I to perfect his
training in surgery. In 1537 he was with the forces
of Marshal Monte-Jan when they laid siege to Turin
in Italy. After the city fell, he recounts an experience in which he came across several enemy soldiers wounded in an explosion. Two of these were
still alive. An old French soldier happened by and
after asking Pare if there were any hope for them,
and learning that there was none, he “gently cut
their throates (sic) without choler.”33(p22) Pare was
horrified at what he perceived as an act of cruel revenge, and rebuked the soldier. The old man replied
that he prayed to God that if he were ever in a similar situation, someone would “doe (sic) as much to
him, to the end he might not miserably languish.”33(p22)
There are countless other examples throughout history of euthanasia by a comrade on the battlefield.
Physicians’ roles in battlefield euthanasia have
also been described. Napoleon’s physician, RenéNicolas Desgenettes, refused to give lethal doses of
opium to soldiers dying of the plague. 34 During
Napoleon’s retreat from Jaffa in 1799, there were
several men suffering from bubonic plague who
could not survive 24 hours even with the best medical care. The army, however, had to march. Napoleon ordered Desgenettes to give them a lethal dose
of laudanum (opium) rather than leaving them to
the mercy of the Turks. Desgenettes refused, believing that it was the obligation of the physician to
Fig. 13-4. This funeral service for a physician who died in a traffic accident (a) just prior to the ground war phase of
Operation Desert Storm was conducted by the chaplain of the 28th Combat Support Hospital (b).
a
b
FPO
FPO
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
387
cure and not to kill. The reports are unclear after
this, with some indication that the chief pharmacist, Royer, gave doses of opium to approximately
50 soldiers, but there is no indication that any of
them died from receiving the medication. 35
A Civilian Example From a “Battlefield” Setting
A contrasting decision, albeit not involving military physicians and combatants, was documented
in the book Schindler’s List36 in which two Jewish
physicians were involved in the administration of
hydrogen cyanide to four patients who could not
be moved from a hospital before a Sondercommando
Aktion during the Holocaust. They defended this
decision as the most ethical one because of the brutal and inhumane death expected when the Nazis
came. The description of this decision is particularly poignant and is recommended for careful reading and reflection. The date is March 13, 1943; the place
is the Jewish ghetto in Cracow, Poland. 36(pp175–180)
Case Study 13-2: The Ghetto Hospital. [A] doctor of
the ghetto’s convalescent hospital, Dr. H, sat among his
last patients, in darkness, grateful that they were isolated
like this on the hospital’s top floor, high above the street,
alone with their pain and fever.
For at street level everyone knew what had happened
at the epidemic hospital near Plac Zgody. An SS detachment under Oberscharführer Albert Hujar had entered the
hospital to close it down and had found Dr. Rosalia Blau
standing among the beds of her scarlet fever and tuberculosis patients….
Hujar himself, acting on the mandate he’d received the
week before from Amon Goeth, shot Dr. Blau in the head.
The infectious patients, some trying to rise in their beds,
some detached in their own delirium, were executed in a
rage of automatic fire.…
The convalescent hospital[’s]…director was a respected physician named Dr. B. By the bleak morning of
March 13, Doctors B and H had reduced its population to
four, all of them immovable. One was a young workman
with galloping consumption; the second, a talented musician with terminal kidney disease. It seemed important to
Dr. H that they somehow be spared the final panic of a
mad volley of fire. Even more so the blind man afflicted
by a stroke, and the old gentleman whose earlier surgery
for an intestinal tumor had left him weakened and burdened with a colostomy.
The medical staff here, Dr. H included, were of the
highest caliber. From this ill-equipped ghetto hospital
would derive the first Polish accounts of Weil’s erythroblastic disease, a condition of the bone marrow, and of
the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. This morning,
though, Dr. H was concerned with the question of cyanide.
With an eye to the option of suicide, H had acquired a
supply of cyanic acid solution. He knew that other doctors had too.…To know he had access to cyanide had
been a comfort for Dr. H on his worst days. By this late
stage of the ghetto’s history, it was the one pharmaceutical left to him and to the other doctors in quantity. There
had rarely been any sulfa. Emetics, ether, and even aspirin were used up. Cyanide was the single sophisticated
drug remaining.
This morning before five, Dr. H had been awakened in
his room in Wit Stwosz Street by the noise of trucks pulling up beyond the wall. Looking down from his window,
he saw the Sonderkommandos assembling by the river
and knew that they had come to take some decisive action in the ghetto. He rushed to the hospital and found Dr.
B and the nursing staff already working there on the same
premise, arranging for every patient who could move to
be taken downstairs and brought home by relatives or
friends. When all except the four had gone, Dr. B told the
nurses to leave, and all of them obeyed except for one
senior nurse. Now she and Doctors B and H remained
with the last four patients in the nearly deserted hospital.
Doctors B and H did not speak much as they waited.
They each had access to the cyanide, and soon H would
be aware that Dr. B’s mind was also sadly preoccupied
with it. There was suicide, yes. But there was euthanasia
as well. The concept terrified H. He had a sensitive face
and a marked delicacy about the eyes. He suffered painfully from a set of ethics as intimate to him as the organs
of his own body. He knew that a physician with common
sense and a syringe and little else to guide him could
add up like a shopping list the values of either course—
to inject the cyanide, or to abandon the patients to the
Sonderkommando. But H knew that these things were
never a matter of calculating sums, that ethics was higher
and more tortuous than algebra.
Sometimes Dr. B would go to the window, look out to
see if the Aktion had begun in the streets, and turn back to
H with a level, professional calm in his eyes. Dr. B, H could
tell, was also running through the options, flicking the
faces of the problem like the faces of riffled cards, then
starting again. Suicide. Euthanasia. Hydro-cyanic acid.…
At dawn the nurse, a calm woman about forty years
old, came to Dr. H and made a morning report. The young
man was resting well, but the blind man with the strokeaffected speech was in a state of anxiety. The musician
and the anal-fistula case had both had a painful night. It
was all very quiet in the convalescent hospital now, however; the patients snuffled in the last of their sleep or the
intimacy of their pain; and Dr. H went out onto the freezing balcony above the courtyard to smoke a cigarette and
once more examine the question.
Last year Dr. H had been at the old epidemic hospital
in Rekawka when the SS decided to close that section of
the ghetto and relocate the hospital. They had lined the
staff up against the wall and dragged the patients downstairs. H had seen old Mrs. Reisman’s leg caught between
the balusters, and an SS man hauling her by the other
leg did not stop and extricate her but pulled until the
trapped limb snapped with an audible crack. That was
how patients were moved in the ghetto. But last year no
one had thought of mercy-killing. Everyone had still hoped
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
388
at that stage that things might improve.
Now, even if he and Dr. B made their decision, H didn’t
know if he had the rigor to feed the cyanide to the ill, or to
watch someone else do it and maintain a professional
dispassion.…
Out there on the balcony he heard the first noise. It
began early and came from the eastern end of the ghetto.
The Raus, raus! of megaphones, the customary lie about
baggage which some people still chose to believe.…
Then he heard the first volley, loud enough to wake the
patients. And a sudden stridency after the firing, a bull
megaphone raging at some plangent feminine voice; and
then the wailing snapped off by a further burst of fire….He
knew that it all might well have cut through even the
precomatose state of the musician with the failed kidneys.
When he returned to the ward, he could see that they
were watching him—even the musician. He could sense
rather than see the way their bodies stiffened in their beds,
and the old man with the colostomy cried out with the
muscular exertion. “Doctor, doctor!” someone said.
“Please!” answered Dr. H, by which he meant, I’m here
and they’re a long way off yet. He looked at Dr. B, who
narrowed his eyes as the noise of evictions broke out
again three blocks away. Dr. B nodded at him, walked to
the small locked pharmaceutical chest at the end of the
ward, and came back with the bottle of hydrocyanic acid.
After a pause, H moved to his colleague’s side. He could
have stood and left it to Dr. B. He guessed that the man
had the strength to do it alone, without the approval of
colleagues. But it would be shameful, H thought, not to
cast his own vote, not to take some of the burden. Dr. H,
though younger than Dr. B, had been associated with the
Jagiellonian University, was a specialist, a thinker. He
wanted to give Dr. B the backing of all that.
“Well,” said Dr. B, displaying the bottle briefly to H.
The word was nearly obscured by a woman’s screaming
and ranting official orders from the far end of Józefínska
Street. Dr. B called the nurse. “Give each patient forty
drops in water.” “Forty drops,” she repeated. She knew
what the medication was. “That’s right,” said Dr. B. Dr. H
also looked at her. Yes, he wanted to say. I’m strong now;
I could give it myself. But if I did, it would alarm them.
Every patient knows that nurses bring the medicine
around.
As the nurse prepared the mixture, H wandered down
the ward and laid his hand on the old man’s. “I have something to help you, Roman,” he told him.…
“Please, Roman,” said the doctor, meaning that the
old man should unclench his body. He believed the
Sonderkommando was coming within the hour. Dr. H felt,
but resisted, a temptation to let him in on the secret. Dr.
B had been liberal with the dosage. A few seconds of
breathlessness and a minor amazement would be no new
or intolerable sensation to old Roman.
When the nurse came with four medicine glasses, none
of them even asked her what she was bringing them. Dr.
H would never know if any of them understood. He turned
away and looked at his watch. He feared that when they
drank it, some noise would begin, something worse than
the normal hospital gasps and gaggings. He heard the
nurse murmuring, “Here’s something for you.” He heard
an intake of breath. He didn’t know if it was patient or
nurse. The woman is the hero of this, he thought.
When he looked again, the nurse was waking the kidney patient, the sleepy musician, and offering him the
glass. From the far end of the ward, Dr. B looked on in a
clean white coat. Dr. H moved to old Roman and took his
pulse. There was none. In a bed at the far end of the ward,
the musician forced the almond-smelling mixture down.
It was all as gentle as H had hoped. He looked at
them—their mouths agape, but not obscenely so, their
eyes glazed and immune, their heads back, their chins
pointed at the ceiling—with the envy any ghetto dweller
would feel for escapees.
Comment: This case perhaps best illustrates the agonizing decision faced by the physician in the Swann scenario (Case 13-1). In this example, the physicians consider killing their patients out of compassion preferable
to allowing them to fall into the hands of the Nazi soldiers
and suffering a violent and painful death.
Thus far this discussion has presented scenarios
that involve a military physician pondering euthanasia, soldiers euthanizing other soldiers, a physician refusing to euthanize soldiers, and a physician
who knew of a decision for euthanasia, but was not
directly involved in being the agent of death. (In
the Schindler’s List account, the person who prepared
and administered the solution was a senior nurse.)
As these examples have shown, the agent actually administering the act of killing can vary from
a fellow soldier to a physician. This discussion will
now focus in on the role of the military health professional. The case presented by Swann is very difficult in that the patients are directly under medical care. As commander of a clearing station, the
military physician has mixed duties to his patients
and to the command. The patients certainly expect
him to continue to provide care for them, but the
command also expects him to be ready for more
patients in the new location (and on time). He cannot take the patients with him and he also cannot
“hide” by allowing a line commander to give the
order for euthanasia because the patients are his
responsibility.
Available Courses of Action: The Swann Scenario
The scenario published by Swann was presented
in abstracted form to the battlefield medical ethics
conference at Brooke Army Medical Center in San
Antonio in May of 1990, approximately 3 years after it had first been published in Military Medicine. 31
There were three basic courses of action identified at the conference, but there are almost infinite
variations of these. The first course of action is to
obey the order to retreat, and to euthanize all patients that cannot be moved. The second is to obey
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
389
the order to retreat, but to leave the patients behind
with a minimum amount of support from healthcare
professionals and chaplains. A third possibility is
to refuse to relocate the unit and to remain with the
patients and provide all care possible to patients in
the present position. Any of these courses of action
could be chosen, and there may be some defensible
argument for each. The general aspects of ethical
decision making will be examined as applied to this
case. These courses of action illustrate problems
with each option.
Ethical Analysis of Options
The three possible options for the physician in
the Swann case will be addressed using several different ethical approaches. There are many other
approaches as well, as a review of Chapter 2 in the
first volume of this text clearly demonstrates. I have
selected these three—principle-based ethical analysis, utilitarian analysis, and military specific analysis—as being the approaches most likely to offer
assistance to the military medical professional in
this particularly difficult situation.
Principle-Based Ethical Analysis
In analyzing a case, it is usually helpful to use a
systematic and standardized approach. In ethical
decision making, a way of doing this is using the
four principles discussed earlier in Chapter 2, Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure,
in Volume I of this textbook. Briefly stated, the principles are:
(1)
Autonomy: the respect for a person’s right
to make his or her own decisions, having
been given all necessary information to
understand the probable outcomes of the
decision;
(2)
Beneficence: doing good for the patient;
involves acting in the patient’s own best
interest, without concern for outside interests;
(3)
Nonmaleficence: avoiding “doing harm” to
the patient; primum non nocere; and
(4)
Justice: “giving to each his due”; distributing resources to patients based on the
balancing of competing claims among all
needy patients.
Because these principles have different agents
and interests at stake, they can conflict with each
other. The resolution of this tension is much of what
ethical decision making is all about. For example,
in a situation where a patient may desire no treatment, including treatment that would clearly improve chances of survival, there is a clear tension
between the patient’s autonomy and the principle
of beneficence. This was an obvious difficulty in the
transition from a paternalistic healthcare system,
where the “doctor knew best,” to the system seen
today where patient autonomy is the criterion for
most decisions.
Another obvious area of conflict is between autonomy and distributive justice when there are limited resources. The decision as to who will live when
not all can live, seen in the early rationing of dialysis, for example, is another very difficult issue (Exhibit 13-4). This is clearly a topical issue in today’s
environment of expensive, high-technology medical care. It will likely have even greater weight as
the United States proceeds with healthcare reform. 37
Using these four principles—autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice—the following
analysis of this particular case, the Swann scenario,
can be made.
Autonomy. Using the first principle, that of autonomy, one would want to examine the underlying
issue of whether or not a soldier has true autonomy,
or whether he has voluntarily or involuntarily given
this up to some degree. It may well not be the autonomous choice of a soldier to attack a hill from
which a machine gun is firing, but in the military
this action is performed routinely. As discussed
before, the soldier doesn’t receive “informed consent”
before his charge up the hill.
By analogy, a soldier who is injured probably
doesn’t have the autonomous choice as to what
treatment he would receive and when he would
receive it. There is considerable intrinsic loss of
autonomy upon joining the military. There also may
be overriding considerations (as seen in the scenario) preventing a patient from receiving all the
care he might desire or request. Should patients be
fully informed of the situation and their prognosis? It might be possible to discuss the situation with
some of the “expectant” patients and allow, as much
as possible, the patient to enter into the decision
making process. However, this might just cause
more suffering and anxiety when the patient learns
of the true situation. If his wishes cannot be respected, this could be even more unnerving.
However, what if the patient requests active euthanasia after learning about the situation? It may
well be the autonomous, expressed wish of the patient to be killed, both due to current suffering, as
well as concern for greatly increased suffering
caused by being captured (and presumably tortured
or killed by the enemy). The latter is certainly a facMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
390
tor that is not likely to be experienced within the
civilian sector and might have enough moral weight
to sway the decision in favor of euthanasia. Should
this request be considered a request for “medical
treatment”? In his article, Dr. Swann asserts that “in
war, euthanasia is a justifiable method of treatment
available to the physician.”31(p546) If it is morally permissible to euthanize a patient, it may only be a
small step to requiring this to be performed as part
of normal medical practice and it would be much
more difficult to refuse to provide this “treatment”
when requested. And then the question arises as to
whether a physician has a moral responsibility to
provide all treatment a patient requests. This is particularly true on the battlefield when it is impossible to refer the patient to another physician and
withdraw from caring for the patient. However,
even on the battlefield, the physician continues to
be a moral agent, responsible for his actions.
The next question is “Who should be the one who
actually performs the mercy killing if that is the
choice?” There could be an argument for having the
physician removed from the process because society does not expect a physician to be involved with
killing patients. However, the physician is already
deeply involved and any attempt to separate himself in this situation is just a vain attempt to establish some moral distancing. The method of euthanasia chosen may be important here as well. Using
a scarce resource (morphine or other medication)
in the face of expected large numbers of patients in
the future may be inappropriate. It may be necessary to use a weapon instead. If this is the case, this
may also mitigate against the physician being personally involved.
Another issue revolves around what should be
done for patients who are unable to participate in
the decision-making process because they are sedated or have shock or head injury causing altered
consciousness. They do not lose their “right” to the
same merciful dying just because they can no longer
express their wishes. One would prefer to provide
the same level of comfort and dignity to all patients,
not just to those who are fortunate (or unfortunate)
enough to be conscious. Therefore, one would think
that all patients would receive the same benefit from
mercy killing and to deny it to an unconscious patient would be unjust. However, by opening it up
to patients who cannot request it, one is clearly not
making the decision on the basis of autonomy, but
by judging what would be in their “best interests.”
Deciding in the “best interests” of patients, however, allows the physician to determine just what
those best interests are. This is a position of great
EXHIBIT 13-4
A DOCTOR REFLECTS ON LIFE AND DEATH DECISIONS
In the early 1970s when renal dialysis and kidney transplantation were being developed, a team at Walter
Reed Army Hospital was involved in helping to determine who would receive these extraordinary, life-saving
methods of treatment. I was a member of that team. The number of patients in chronic end-stage renal disease
far exceeded the number of dialysis machines. The team’s job was to evaluate the patients and their living
related donors, for their psychological ability to go through these revolutionary new techniques. A separate
committee of physicians and laymen determined who should be selected for dialysis. Collectively these two
groups decided who would live and who would die. It was the ultimate conflict of interest. Some individuals
tried to avoid this duty, but were told that they were the best and most qualified to do it.
Most of these patients wanted to start dialysis, and tried in every way to make a favorable impression, so that
they would be selected. If they were not selected, or developed complications, many wanted help to let them
die quickly and painlessly. Sometimes they killed themselves. This was particularly difficult for the nursing
staff because the patients often asked to be euthanized. After a few months, the medical staff could usually tell
who had the will to go on, and who didn’t. A few nurses admitted to me that they had thought of granting the
patient’s wish [for euthanasia]. The only thing that kept us honest and faithful was to remind each other of our
oath to do them no harm.
Fortunately, this dilemma lasted for only a few years. The federal government began to pay for renal dialysis,
and the biomedical industry ensured that supply met the demand. Renal dialysis was soon available to almost
everyone who needed it.
Source: James Collins, Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
391
power—power that can be abused. It could be inhumane to discuss the real situation with those patients unable to be moved but who can understand
the gravity of the situation. It may cause more harm
for them to know that they are about to be
euthanized. Conversely, even if they had requested
that they not be euthanized, it may still be in their
best interests to be killed painlessly and not abandoned to the enemy. This is a slippery slope through
nonvoluntary euthanasia (where the patient can’t
request it) into involuntary euthanasia (where the
patient can request it but is not consulted or the
patient requests that euthanasia not be done).
Looking at autonomy issues from the perspective of the medical team raises the question, “If the
decision is to leave some personnel behind, how is
that decision made?” This could be an autonomous
decision by the members of the healthcare team who
could volunteer. Or it could be by the commander
ordering certain people to stay (possibly the least
crucial to the mission). It could even be by random
selection. There is no clearly correct answer.
Beneficence. The second principle, that of beneficence, examines what would do the most good for
the patient. Using this principle, one would look
only at what directly affects the individual patient.
Is it ever in his own best interest for the patient to
die? Is life such an overriding “good” that nothing
that shortens it could ever be in the patient’s best
interest? If the patient is imminently dying, could
the slight hastening of his death be considered in
his best interests? This is somewhat beyond most
constructions of beneficence in that it is counterintuitive to suggest that dying is better than living,
but in very unusual situations this may well be true.
Could psychological suffering by the patient waiting for the enemy to capture him, perhaps torture
him, then kill him cause more harm than his dying? It may be that in these extreme situations this
harm could occur and a very real suffering may be
removed by mercy killing. On the other hand, it may
be appropriate to question just how certain it is that
the enemy will indeed kill or torture the patients. If
one is responding to data based on conjecture and
not facts, it would be possible to make a decision
that would be at the very least erroneous and at the
worst morally suspect. The problem with reacting
unquestioningly to “intelligence” (or rumors) is illustrated by the following case/example.
Case Study 13-3: The Terrified Wounded POW. During the Persian Gulf War, a 13-year-old Iraqi soldier, who
had been told that the Americans would torture and kill
any prisoners they captured, suffered a traumatic amputation of his foot from a land mine. He hid himself among
some corpses to attempt to evade capture. He wasn’t
found for over 24 hours and was pleading to die when he
arrived at the 28th Combat Support Hospital. Fortunately,
the mess officer spoke Arabic and by talking with this
young man (“You are in a hospital. You are being treated
kindly, are you not? Has anyone tried to hurt you?”) he
was able to convince the patient that he was going to be
helped and not tortured.
Comment: This case demonstrates the need for translators in the hospitals. It also demonstrates the misinformation that can circulate during a war. The American
forces had likewise heard tales about how the Iraqis
treated captives and in general these were also greatly
exaggerated.
Nonmaleficence. The third principle, that of
nonmaleficence, involves avoiding doing harm to
the patient. Is it harmful to kill the patient? One of
the earliest statements of the principle of nonmaleficence occurs in the Hippocratic Oath where it
states “I will prescribe regimen for the good of my
patients according to my ability and my judgment
and never do harm to anyone.”38 There are at least
two interpretations of how the Hippocratic Oath can
be applied in this situation. One would hold that
the proscription against killing is supreme. It is clear
in the oath that one is swearing to not kill a patient,
or to advise a patient to kill himself (“To please no
one will I prescribe a deadly drug, nor give advice
which may cause his death”38). This proscribes any
form of physician-assisted dying and is the dominant interpretation of the Oath. The other view
would see the withholding of a comfortable death
as a cruel travesty of the principle of nonmaleficence
in that it is “doing harm” to the patient to allow
him to continue suffering (or to face increased suffering when captured) and that this violates the
potentially conflicting goal of acting “for the good
of my patient,” if it is indeed good for him to stop
his suffering. It could also be harmful to allow continued suffering without adequate pain control.
Distributive Justice. The fourth principle, that
of distributive justice, balances competing claims
on limited resources. Obviously, if resources were
not limited, all patients would receive excellent pain
control, would be evacuated prior to any expected
enemy contact, and would be provided with excellent medical care. However, in the Swann scenario
there are competing demands on the resources
available. There are other patients requiring care,
patients who will survive if they receive proper care.
The expectant patients have already been prioritized into a lower category based on patients already in the system. The situation clearly can only
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
392
get worse, with the unit retreating and being required to set up to receive more casualties from an
expected escalation in combat. Who has a greater
demand on the resources—current patients or potential future patients who may be more likely to
survive? This is a classic conflict in duties. A physician treating his patient is usually unwilling to make
decisions limiting his patient’s care and he does feel
a greater obligation to the “patient with a face.”
However, in this scenario, the duty to the command
and to the other soldiers in the supported unit may
require the physician to allow these patients to die
in the hopes of treating future patients and overall
doing more good. Even the possible course of action in which the expectant patients are left behind
with some care providers may be problematic due to
the decreased ability of the unit providing care to future patients. Any decrement in the unit’s ability to
provide care for future patients in the new location is
a violation of the orders to retreat as well as a violation of the commander’s intent in those orders.
In summary, then, the principle-based ethical
analysis looks at the overall situation of these patients
in terms of autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence,
and distributive justice. Ultimately, however, it is
how the individual physician weighs these components against the facts as they appear at the moment
that will assist in making what may be the most
difficult decision any physician ever has to make.
I cannot offer a cookbook “solution” to the Swann
scenario based on this analysis, or the following
two, for that matter, other than to note that the first
step in understanding the dynamics of such a decision must come long before the physician is confronted by such a horror. Only by thinking about
these issues now, before the need arises, can a physician guard against being overwhelmed by the reality of the task at hand should events, like those in
the Swann scenario, occur. To not begin to consider
the situation of these patients and their needs in a
hypothetical manner when there is no crisis is to
risk being unable to quickly evaluate their situation and respond accordingly in an actual crisis. A
failure to be prepared for such a situation is, indeed,
a failure to provide care for patients when they are
most vulnerable.
In beginning this discussion of the ethical analysis of options, I noted that several approaches
would be presented. Each of these has bearing on
evaluating the scenario and coming to an ethically
justifiable resolution of the patients’ needs. The
utilitarian analysis that follows is the second of
these approaches to understanding the difficult
decision that the physician faces.
Utilitarian Analysis
One could defend euthanasia in the Swann scenario by the utilitarian maxim, “the greatest good
for the greatest number,” because by euthanizing
the patients who cannot be transported (in this case
due to constraints on time and transportation assets) and displacing the entire functioning unit to a
new location to receive more casualties, one could
maximize the good done for the line units and other,
potentially salvageable, casualties. This could even
contribute to winning the war and protecting society, an apparent good that presumably would have
some moral weight. If any members of the healthcare
team were left behind with the casualties, this
would diminish the effective strength of the unit,
thereby decreasing the good that could be done for
the expected casualties in the future. By analogy,
using any of the limited medical supplies or medications to provide further care for those left behind
would also diminish the good to be done for future
casualties. Using this model, the method of euthanasia must be examined. It would be inappropriate
to use the limited morphine to assist in the death of
the expectant patients, but rather it may be appropriate to use a weapon or other method of ensuring their death. The patients who are not expectant
will also present a problem. They can not be transported either and they may need to be left with only
limited ammunition and possibly no medical supplies or personnel. This may be such an unusual
situation that extreme solutions are necessary. Using this line of reasoning, the utilitarian analysis
would seem to require euthanasia of (or simply
abandoning) all patients and retreating with an intact unit and supplies.
Conversely, however, should this become policy,
the utilitarian analysis might reach the opposite
conclusion. This concept was introduced previously
in the section on triage. As stated before, the excellent medical care traditionally provided to US
troops is listed as a “force multiplier.” US soldiers
are more willing to expose themselves to danger
because they believe that they will receive superb
medical care if they are wounded. However, if soldiers perceive that wounded comrades may be
killed within this medical system, particularly if the
general perception is that the wounded are not requesting this, it could diminish the “will to fight”
and possibly affect the outcome of the battle.
Once again, it is clear that the conclusion depends
on the interpretation of the facts, an analysis of their
probability, and their weighting (or prioritization).
There truly is no simple, consistent, “book answer.”
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
393
Ethical analysis is often unable to identify a single,
proper course of action.
Military Specific Analysis
There are several problems with euthanasia on
the battlefield, some of which can be generalized
from civilian experiences and others that may be
unique within the military. In the discussion that
follows, several of these problems will be explored
using the experience from the Netherlands, which
has recently legalized euthanasia. Euthanasia has
been practiced openly since at least 1973, and, although technically illegal, it had not been prosecuted since 1981, when guidelines under which
physicians could practice assisted suicide and euthanasia and report these deaths as such were established. In 2001, the Dutch parliament legalized
this practice. 39
Attempts to Control the Euthanasia Process. In
the Netherlands, where there is a growing experience with euthanasia and physician-assisted dying,
there are very stringent controls on the actions, including ensuring that the patient is competent, that
there is a well-informed and well-considered request, that there is durability of the request over
time, that at least two physicians certify that the
request is apparently the autonomous decision of
the patient, and that all other options have been
explored. 40 On the battlefield, however, it will be
very difficult to have decisions such as these be
durable because this is both a volatile and an emergency situation. If there were enough time to develop durability of the request, it would be likely
that transportation assets could be arranged. The
urgency of the situation requires that these decisions be made within moments and the effects of
the decisions will likely be permanent. It may be
possible for consultation with other physicians to
occur and presumably this would be necessary, if
there were more than one physician in the unit. The
physician should also utilize the “chain of command”
to benefit from the experience of more senior medical officers. Clearly, there would be “strength in
numbers” and a difficult decision would be somewhat easier, if one could talk it out with peers. Unfortunately, if the elements of the decision have not
been examined before the situation arises, it will be
very difficult to quickly work through all the ramifications as the enemy approaches.
“Slippery Slope” Issues. Another concern with
following the Netherlands model is that of potential abuses. 41 Various reports show significant
underreporting of euthanasia cases in the Netherlands and document that many of those reported
are actually not in compliance with the standards
accepted by the community. Even with these carefully crafted controls, there are many reports of violations of the controls, relaxation of the reporting,
and other abuses. 42 For example, the Remmelink
report43 estimated the reporting rate to be 18% and
about 2,700 deaths due to euthanasia and assisted
suicide. It also documented more than 1,000 cases
of patients being euthanized without their consent
as well as 8,100 patients being given an overdose
of pain medicine, not to relieve pain, but to cause
their death. For 4,941 (61% of these patients), this
was performed without their consent. There are also
reports of infanticide, which are clearly not covered
by the legal guidelines. A study similar to the
Remmelink Commission’s was performed in 1995
with similar results. 41,44 The reporting rate of cases
of euthanasia had improved to 41%, but this still
means that the majority of cases were not reported. 41
This report also documented an increase in euthanasia and assisted-suicide deaths to 3,600 while involuntary euthanasia cases were down to about
950. 44 Reports continue of depressed patients and
infants being euthanized. There are reports of older
citizens who are afraid to enter Dutch hospitals for
fear of being killed. 45 These data give credence to
the slippery slope argument. The battlefield is an
arena that is less subject to careful and critical review and thus there is a real concern for controlling euthanasia here.
Moral Issues. There is still a problem from a
moral viewpoint with active euthanasia for many
professionals. It is difficult to envision a healthcare
professional allowing a patient to be tortured or
killed in a brutal fashion when overrun by the enemy. This, however, does not mandate that the
healthcare professional participate in or encourage
the practice of euthanasia. The physician is a moral
agent and as such has an obligation to uphold his
oath. A physician may find it impossible to participate in the killing of his patients. He, as a moral
agent, may feel his duty to his patients and the
Hippocratic Oath and Oslerian doctrine of “firstly,
do no harm” would prevent his involvement in
killing or in abandoning his patients. The JudeoChristian view of the sanctity of life and the Hippocratic tradition of not killing a patient carry the force
of 2,500 to 3,000 years of learning, literature, and
culture. It is difficult to overlook this powerful
determinant of action, and it is not necessarily appropriate to propose this. Deeply held values may
indeed be properly held values and there may be
excellent reasons to hold to them.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
394
This rather lengthy discussion of the Swann scenario, including the ethical analysis of options and
the impact of those options, can only conclude with
the observation that should it ever come time to
make such a decision, any physician making that
decision must have thought long and hard about
the issues beforehand. The physician should also
seek counsel from more senior military physicians
as he develops his decision-making ability for situations such as these. There simply is no “cookbook”
approach, or formulaic solution, that draws the line
and states that under these circumstances one
should euthanize and under those one should not.
The fluidity and chaos of the battlefield are such
that it is simply not possible to reduce these decisions to simple approaches.
Military Policy vs. Practicality
Although it may be wrong to propose policy to
support battlefield euthanasia, I personally have difficulty in saying that under no circumstances would I
ever request such an action for myself, and therefore
I cannot categorically state that I would never even
consider this action. I believe that almost any course
of action would be preferable to euthanasia and would
recommend that fellow physicians examine their convictions as well. It is true that in the rare “supreme
emergency” situation, basic moral convictions and
moral laws might be violated. However, there is a very
real danger in generalizing these situations and making the indication for violating moral laws anything
other than such an extreme and supreme emergency
that the consequences of not violating the moral law
are so unthinkable that they cannot occur. It is possible that the consequences of leaving patients behind
to be tortured and killed would constitute such a case
and may prescribe euthanasia, but such cases should
be extremely rare and the consequences should be
carefully examined. The potential negative consequences of adopting euthanasia as official policy are
so great that it should remain proscribed and decisions to violate policy should remain extremely rare
and subject to review.
PARTICIPATION IN INTERROGATION OF PRISONERS OF WAR
Another issue that may arise on the battlefield is
that of physician participation in the interrogation
of enemy prisoners of war (EPWs). The most likely
scenario would occur when the prisoner is already
injured when captured, and he has been presented
for medical care. It is also possible that physicians
might be asked to use their medical expertise and
knowledge to attempt to extract information from
an EPW who is not already injured. These courses
of action lie on a continuum from ones that are
clearly extremely morally objectionable and constitute torture to those that may be morally acceptable. Some cases will be analyzed to attempt to identify some of these issues. It is important to clearly
identify factors in the decisions and to carefully
weigh the criteria used in deciding.
Restrictions Imposed by the Geneva Conventions
Physician participation in interrogation of EPWs,
at least where such participation is able to be classified as torture, is clearly proscribed by Article 12
of the Geneva Conventions concerning wounded
and sick in the armed forces: “[they]…shall not
be…subjected to torture or to biological experiments….”3 All wounded EPWs are considered noncombatants and as such are afforded protections in
general under that status. They are to be cared for
without discrimination and to be triaged equally with
US troops as well as those troops of allied nations.
“Moral Distancing”
The medical profession has traditionally attempted to remove itself from being identified with
some actions not considered to be within its charter by establishing some “moral distance” between
itself and the action. An example is the official position of the American Medical Association (AMA)
on physician participation in capital punishment. 47(pp9–12) In this document, the AMA states that
physicians should not be involved in capital punishment. It describes activities that are considered
to be participation, including, “but not limited to,
the following actions: prescribing or administering
tranquilizers and other psychotropic agents and
medications that are part of the execution procedure; monitoring vital signs on site or remotely (including monitoring electrocardiograms); attending
or observing an execution as a physician; and rendering of technical advice regarding execution.”47(p10)
Actions considered permissible by the AMA include
testifying at a trial, certifying competence to stand
trial, “certifying death, provided that the condemned
has been declared dead by another person,”47(p10) and
treating acute suffering in the condemned person
awaiting execution. The issue seen here is that the
medical profession does not desire to be associated
with certain actions and therefore attempts to separate itself from even peripheral involvement in the
process. This attempt for separation exists even
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
395
though a case could be made for physician participation to prevent cruelty or unnecessary suffering.
Andre Guillotine was a physician who was concerned
with the suffering of prisoners as they were being executed. 48 He was instrumental in establishing a law
requiring execution to be carried out painlessly and
efficiently by means of a machine because other less
efficient and less rapid methods of execution led to
unnecessary suffering of the condemned. His invention therefore would be more merciful. His name became synonymous with execution and his device became a standard method of execution, even being used
by the Nazi physicians to obtain the freshest “specimens” for their dissection work by having the guillotine attached to the dissecting table and beginning the
dissection just after the victim was killed. 49 (See Chapter 14, Nazi Medical Ethics: Ordinary Doctors?, for a
further discussion of science and medicine during the
Nazi era.) Much of the concern over physician participation in capital punishment or interrogation is
that this moral distancing is violated. There is justifiable concern that the active involvement of a
physician in interrogation will lead to a “misuse”
of medical knowledge and possibly even participation in actual torture.
Developing and Participating in Torture
There is something particularly repugnant in the
image of a physician inflicting harm on a helpless
person. Unfortunately, however, physicians have
been involved in torture—both in developing methods of torture as well as actually participating in
the torture process—for generations. 50,51 The possible areas of involvement will be explored and an
attempt will be made to answer why physicians
would do so and which physicians could be most
at risk for this.
Participation in torture can occur at any point
along the process but will be divided into development of methods of torture; examinations and treatment prior to torture; presence, examination or
treatment during torture; examination or treatment
after torture; and concealing facts after torture.
Physicians have assisted in developing technology and perfecting techniques used in torture. An
example of the former is the “Tucker Telephone”
(Figure 13-5) reportedly designed by a prison doctor, Dr. A.E. Rollins. 52 This device used an electrical
generator taken from a ring type telephone and
wired in sequence with two dry cell batteries. The
wires were attached to the victim’s great toe and
penis and the crank was turned, generating a highvoltage electrical charge. The process was repeated
several times with the duration of charge being
designed to stop just short of the victim “passing
out.”52 It is clear as well that this method of torture
was made more efficient by medical involvement
during the use of the device.
Involvement of the medical profession in certifying that prisoners are physically capable of being
tortured is the next area of involvement. An example of this reportedly occurred in Israel, in which
a physician was required to examine a prisoner and
determine if there was any physical limitation to
using coercive means (including an isolation cell,
restraints, blindfolds, and subjecting him to prolonged standing) in interrogation. This practice has
been estimated to involve at least 5,000 Palestinians
Fig. 13-5. The “Tucker Telephone,” so named because it
was used at the Tucker State Prison Farm in Tucker, Arkansas. This device was used to deliver electrical shock
to an individual. It was developed by the prison physician; its use was perfected by Mr. Jim Bruton, the prison
superintendent. The device was last used in the 1970s.
Reproduced with permission from the Arkansas Department of Correction. Available at http://www.state.ar.us/
doc/images/gal28.jpg.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
396
a year during the early 1990s. After this practice was
exposed, the Israeli Medical Association directed its
members not to fill in the fitness form because the
physician by doing so becomes an accomplice in
torture. 53–55
The presence of a physician during torture and
even using medical means to contribute to the torture is documented in Brazil. Physicians and nurses
assisted by reviving victims who had lost consciousness, or even had cardiorespiratory arrests. They
also examined patients during the torture sessions
and used medications to enhance the effects of torture. 56 Another example is that seen in the involvement of the psychiatric profession in the use of psychoactive drugs in the former Soviet Union. Patients
who were determined to be enemies of the state were
also diagnosed as being insane. Psychoactive drugs
were administered to these patients, partly in order
to make them more susceptible to interrogation. 57
One of the more infamous cases of physician involvement after torture when the victim was
brought to him for treatment is that of Steve Biko,
who died on 12 September 1977 of head injuries
probably received during a torture session. The physicians involved were disciplined for their negligence in adequately diagnosing and treating this
patient. 58 There are other examples reported in
Chile, Kuwait, Mauritania, and Turkey. There are
also reports of medical reports being falsified in
order to conceal evidence of torture in these same
countries.
Physicians in the military may be particularly
susceptible to helping in torture methods. There are
several reasons for this, including the predisposition of military members to obey orders, the closed
and hierarchical structure within the military, and
an identification of physicians with the military unit
to which he belongs. This identification with the
unit is a very powerful force in determining behavior. The means of developing torturers has been
studied by Mika Haritos-Fatouros with findings
that are disturbing for those in the military. 59 In
Greece, soldiers were selected to become interrogators using guidelines developed during the military junta in power from 1967 to 1974. Potential torturers were selected on the basis of their having
political views (as well as coming from a family with
those political views) in agreement with those of
the junta as well as their strong anti-Communist
behavior. They also underwent a second selection
process during their training based on their ”(a)
ability to endure beating of all kinds and exercises
to exhaustion; (b) obedience to the demands of authority, even of the most illogical and degrading
kind; [and] (c) free selection of the part of the recruit
to go through the 3-month hard training of KESA
[the Center for Military Police Training].”59(p1114)
They had been, and continued to be, subjected to
initiation rites that included withdrawing all basic
human privileges (food, water, and toilet facilities)
designed to induce severe stress. This served to
destroy any ability to resist as well as promoting a
group identity, fostering an “us versus them” mentality, developing a group mentality that all actions
done by the group are appropriate, and that group
members are totally dependent upon and faithful
to each other. There were group nicknames for each
other as well as for the trainers and methods of torture. The recruits were subjected to many of the
methods of torture they would ultimately use on
others. Haritos-Fatouros, a psychologist, identifies
four principles of behavior change used by the trainers. These were (1) overlearning (learning to obey
without questioning), (2) desensitization (enduring
pain themselves and starting to experience it as a
part of everyday life), (3) role modeling (older recruits flogged and degraded the newer ones), and
(4) reinforcement (both negative and positive). This
whole process has chilling similarities to that received by members of US elite forces, including
physicians associated with those units, and they
appear to be very effective. Military physicians
must be extremely careful to avoid this overidentification with their unit and becoming participants
in illegal or unethical actions.
Battlefield Cases of Physician Participation in
Torture
A continuum of cases will be presented, with
possible explanations for participation or nonparticipation for each. These cases are fictional but are based
on situations that have occurred on the battlefield.
Case Study 13-4: Administering Drugs to Assist Interrogation. A captured enemy soldier is brought to a
military physician by troops who are specialists in interrogation, including medical facilitation of the process. They
tell the physician that this captured soldier knows vital
information that could prevent the destruction of an entire unit. The interrogators want the physician to give this
soldier succinylcholine to transiently paralyze his respiratory muscles so that he will remain alert but unable to
breathe. The terror this produces should induce him to
talk after the effects of the paralyzing agent have worn
off. If a single administration isn’t effective, the dosage
could be repeated as often as necessary. 60
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
397
Comment: In this case, the requested medical intervention is clear. The physician is asked to be directly involved in the interrogation. This medical intervention is
clearly torture. Succinylcholine is a depolarizing neuromuscular blocker that will cause total paralysis of all skeletal muscles, including those required for breathing. The
patient is fully awake and alert, but unable to breathe and
would need artificial ventilation to survive. The effects
wear off in approximately 5 minutes.
As was discussed earlier, this degree of involvement is clearly proscribed by Article 17 of the
Geneva Conventions concerning treatment of prisoners of war23 and would generally be condemned
by the medical profession. Thus, the superficial
answer to this request is that this amount of involvement is well beyond the comfort level of most physicians. However, there may be factors that would
cause the physician to reach a different decision.
The size of the unit in danger, or its importance,
may have some moral weight for the physician in
deciding about participation. If the unit is a major
command, and its being destroyed would cause the
war to be lost, this might be considered the supreme
emergency addressed earlier. Another possible situation could be one similar to the terrorist attacks
on September 11, 2001 on the World Trade Center
towers in New York and the Pentagon. If one of the
terrorists had been captured before the others were
able to execute their missions, it could become more
attractive to use all means available to save the lives
of thousands of American citizens. But in the absence of a supreme emergency, it is difficult to justify physician participation in this interrogation,
both legally and morally.
Another form of chemical interrogation that these
specialists might suggest uses Sodium Amytal®, the
so-called “truth serum.” This agent is a barbiturate
with an intermediate onset and duration of effect
that may assist in a hypnotic state or decrease resistance to questioning. This differs slightly from
succinylcholine in that this method of extracting
information is less terrifying and thus less likely to
be considered torture. Sodium Amytal® “just” loosens the EPW’s inhibitions and makes him more
likely to talk. (This effect is questionable and its effectiveness is probably much less than is commonly
believed, but the ethical issues remain the same.)
In this situation, the intervention is possibly less
clearly forbidden under Article 17 of the Geneva
Conventions, as well as Article 13 (“no prisoner of
war may be subjected to…medical or scientific experiments of any kind which are not justified by
the medical, dental or hospital treatment of the prisoner concerned and carried out in his interest”23),
but ethical issues persist. One issue in both variations of this case is the use of medical knowledge
and expertise in the interrogation. There is no moral
distancing here. The physician is deeply involved
in using his unique abilities for purposes other than
the best medical interests of the EPW. This is at the
very least a violation of the EPW’s autonomy and
would be very difficult to justify ethically. The extreme emergency issue discussed before could be
applied to using Sodium Amytal® in this case. Once
again, this would seem to be the only potential justification for such an action. This extreme emergency situation should be invoked very rarely, if at
all, because grave violations of human rights could
be condoned using this argument. Even with very
stringent controls, a true slippery slope would likely
occur and it is probably appropriate to forbid any
use of these techniques. Department of Defense
doctrine prohibits the “use of any form of physical
or mental torture or any coercion to compel prisoners
to provide information”61(p4) and this is appropriate.
Another reason mitigating against the use of
medical methods of interrogation is that there is the
likelihood that even if these methods were to be
employed, the EPW would not give information or
that the information given would be false. It is felt
that torture is extremely unlikely to give valuable
information62 and therefore the lack of likelihood
of success should mitigate against using torture as
an interrogation technique. This may remove even
the extreme situation justification for the action.
Case Study 13-5: Withholding or Delaying Treatment to Facilitate Interrogation. During intense combat, a captured enemy soldier is brought to the military
physician. The EPW’s arm is hanging limply by his side,
injured by a missile. He appears to be in mild pain. Before the physician can assess the damage he is told that
this captured soldier has information that could save the
lives of several of the units’ soldiers. The soldiers want to
question the EPW immediately because any delay in obtaining information could lead to the loss of the soldiers.
They add that if they offer him treatment only on the condition that he gives them this information, this might make
the difference between his talking or not talking and thus
saving several soldiers’ lives. 60
Comment: The issue in this case is whether it is appropriate to withhold medical care, or to predicate medical care on cooperation by the wounded EPW.
Withholding or delaying of treatment as a tactical approach to gaining information from an interrogation is clearly forbidden under Article 12 of the
Geneva Conventions, which notes that individuals
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
398
“not willfully (sic) be left without medical assistance
and care….Only urgent medical reasons will authorize priority in the order of treatment to be administered.”3 However, it is important to look at the
ethical issues involved here as well and to make a
decision based not only on the legality or illegality
of the action. In these circumstances, this action
would be difficult to justify ethically. The EPW’s
autonomy would be clearly violated if needed medical care were to be withheld or predicated upon his
disclosing information. Beneficence would dictate
appropriate medical care when triage and medical
indications are met. Nonmal-eficence would also
mitigate against refusing care. An argument might
be made that the EPW is still acting as a combatant
if he refuses to disclose the information, but this is
an extremely weak argument and would not hold
up under examination to determine if it could be
generalized to all situations, which is a basic tenet
of ethical decision making. If friendly soldiers
should not give this information if they were
wounded and captured, this shouldn’t be expected
from enemy soldiers either. Geneva Conventions
(Article 17) are clear in what information is required
from prisoners of war (“bound to give only his surname, first names and rank, date of birth, and army,
regimental, personal or serial number, or failing
this, equivalent information”23), and information
critical to the war would clearly be protected. It
would also seem to be a form of torture under Article
17 to withhold pain medication or to refuse to treat
a person unless he would disclose information
(“No…form of coercion, may be inflicted on prisoners of war to secure from them information of
any kind whatever. Prisoners of war who refuse to
answer may not be threatened, insulted, or exposed
to unpleasant or disadvantageous treatment of any
kind.”23) This is a very short “slippery slope” distance
from even more active participation in torture.
Case Study 13-6: “Looking the Other Way”: Participation by Silence. The military physician is treating
his own and enemy soldiers during intense combat and
has heard stories that on occasion captured soldiers who
have vital information and will not talk are taken up in
helicopters. If they continue to be silent, they are thrown
off. The physician is now treating an injured enemy soldier for a superficial flesh wound. The paramedic comes
to the physician and states that interrogators waiting in
another room were overheard to say that the enemy patient now being treated has vital information. After he is
finished treatment, they are considering threatening to
take him up in a helicopter and to throw him out if he
won’t talk. 63(p453)
Comment: Conflicts are more likely in this case, because there is some moral distance for the physician. The
reports are more hearsay than actual fact and it is thus
possible that the interrogators are not really considering
such an action. It is also possible that the stories of such
actions are exaggerated and that the discussion between
the interrogators is just for “show.”
However, if the facts are true, that is, EPWs are
being treated in this way, this would be a clear violation of Article 13 of the Geneva Conventions
(“prisoners of war must at all times be protected,
particularly against acts of violence or intimidation”23). If the interrogators in this case are likely to
treat the EPW in this manner, then the physician
may have an obligation to his patient to attempt to
protect him from this action and may attempt to
prevent such treatment. Intervening in this way
could be justified under the Geneva Conventions
treatment for EPWs and as a beneficent action for
the patient. A criterion possibly mitigating against
this attempt would be that by “blowing the whistle”
in this case, future EPWs requiring medical care
might not be brought to the medical treatment facility and wounded EPWs may suffer more overall
harm than good derived from this current action.
It may also be possible that devoting the necessary time to investigate the allegations, discuss the
Geneva Conventions with the interrogators, and
follow the appropriate notification procedures may
hinder the care of other patients for which the physician is responsible. However, it seems likely that
ignoring the possibility that this patient would be
tortured would be difficult, if not impossible, for
the physician. It would also make the physician a
moral accomplice to the torture.
Geneva Conventions require (in Article 129) that
signatories search for and prosecute persons who
commit grave breaches such as torture of EPWs. 20,23
The physician who does not attempt to stop such
actions would be culpable under this Article and
could be prosecuted himself.
The easy and glib answer to the question about
physician involvement in interrogation (or even torture) of EPWs is that it is contrary to every tenet of
medical practice. However, in battle there are many
factors that make this easy answer less satisfactory
and will certainly cause some moral distress to those
making the decision. It may be impossible for the
physician to separate his fear, anger, and hatred for
the enemy who may have killed or injured friends
or colleagues (or at the very least has caused severe destruction and death to friendly troops) and
this may influence his decision. Decisions made
under these conditions of duress may not be ethically defensible, or even legal. It is important for
all physicians to have thought through such possibilities and to have preliminarily determined some
basis for deciding.
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
399
CONCLUSION
There are many situations that can lead to stressful decisions, both in peacetime and in war. Caring
for patients on a daily basis in peacetime is tremendously challenging with many ethical dilemmas experienced. The cases in this chapter demonstrate
how much more challenging it is to care for patients
on the battlefield. There are added factors encountered on the battlefield that simply have no civilian
counterpart—there usually isn’t an “enemy” threatening the civilian healthcare team and civilian patients aren’t usually needed immediately for a
greater mission. On the battlefield, decisions must
be made immediately and often without all the data
one would like. One may be stressed, tired, or even
wounded at the instant these decisions need to be
made. Most likely, one will not have time for deliberation and reflection on these consequences and
models. A major way to increase one’s ability to
make a decision that must be made “in an instant”
but “lived with for the rest of your life” is to approach these issues now and at least have some preliminary internal guides for decision making. The
difficulty experienced in making these decisions is
perhaps summed up in the following modification
of a quote concerning combat surgery often used
by Colonel Basil Pruitt,64 Medical Corps, US Army—
“The certainty of [ethical] opinion is directly proportional to the square of the distance from the site
of combat.” It is my hope that this discussion has
stimulated some questions and some discomfort, for
then there may be continued growth in ethical decision making for the battlefield.
The following chapters in this volume will continue
to explore the issues unique to military medical ethics, examining the situation as it exists currently.
They will also attempt to clarify future directions
for study and propose an initial military medical
ethic.
REFERENCES
1.
US Department of the Army. Combat Health Support in Stability Operations and Support Operations. Washington,
DC: DA; 27 October 1997. Field Manual 8-42.
2.
US Department of the Army. Medical Evacuation in a Theater of Operations Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures.
Washington, DC: DA; 14 April 2000. Field Manual 8-10-6.
3.
Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick in Armed Forces in the Field. 12
August 1949. In: US Department of the Army. Treaties Governing Land Warfare. Washington, DC: DA; 7 December 1956. Department of the Army Pamphlet 27-1.
4.
Jeffer EK. Command of military medical units: Grounding the paradigm. Mil Med. 1996;161:346–348.
5.
US Department of the Army. Neuropsychiatry and Mental Health. Washington, DC: DA; 1 September 1984. Army
Regulation 40-216.
6.
Artiss KL. Human behavior under stress: From combat to social psychiatry. Mil Med. 1963;128:1011–1015.
7.
Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, eds. Military Psychiatry: Preparing in Peace for War. In: Textbook
of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden
Institute; 1994.
8.
Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes JW, eds. War Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1995.
9.
Howe EG, Jones FD. Ethical issues in combat psychiatry. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM,
eds. Military Psychiatry: Preparing in Peace for War. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of
The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1994. 115–132.
10.
US Department of the Army. Planning for Health Service Support. Washington, DC: DA; 15 February 1985. Field
Manual 8-55. Section 1-5.
11.
US Department of the Army. Planning for Health Service Support. Washington, DC: DA; 9 September 1994. Field
Manual 8-55.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
400
12.
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 4th ed. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1994.
13.
US Department of the Army. Medical, Dental, and Veterinary Care. Washington, DC: DA; 30 July 1999. Army
Regulation 40-3.
14.
US Department of the Army. Army Command Policy. Washington, DC: DA; 15 July 1999. Army Regulation 600-20.
15.
United States Code, Title 10. Armed Forces, Subtitle B. Army, Part II. Personnel, Chapter 355. Hospitalization,
Section. 3723. Approved 13 November 1998.
16.
Moran L. The Anatomy of Courage: The Classic Study of the Soldier’s Struggle Against Fear. The Art of Command
series ed. Garden City Park, New York: Avery Publishing Group; 1987.
17.
Code of Conduct for Members of the Armed Forces of the United States. Executive Order 10631 on 17 August
1955 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; amended through Executive Order 12017 on 3 November 1977 by
President Jimmy Carter; and amended again through Executive Order 12633 on 28 March 1988 by President
Ronald Reagan. 53 Federal Register 10355 (1988).
18.
United States Code, Title 5. Government Organization and Employees. Part III, Subpart B, Chapter 33, Subchapter II. Section 3331.
19.
5 USC § 3331.
20.
The Joint Staff Officer’s Guide 1997. Armed Forces Staff College. Washington, DC. Armed Forces Staff College
Publication 1.
21.
Operational Law Handbook (2002). International and Operational Law Department. The Judge Advocate
General’s School. Charlottesville, VA (pages 30, 36, 37, 38).
22.
Barondess JA. Medicine against society: Lessons from the Third Reich. JAMA. 1996;276(20):1657–1661.
23.
Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War. 12 August 1949. In: US Department of the
Army. Treaties Governing Land Warfare. Washington, DC: DA; 7 December 1956. Army Pamphlet 27-1.
24.
Smith AM. The ethos of the military surgeon. Pharos. 1993;56(4)l:11–14.
25.
Larrey DJ. Memoirs of Military Surgery, and Campaigns of the French Armies. Hall RW, trans. Baltimore, Md: J
Cushing; 1814.
26.
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary. Tenth edition. Springfield, Mass: Merriam-Webster; 1999.
27.
Bowen TE, Bellamy RF. Emergency War Surgery. Second United States Revision of The Emergency War Surgery
NATO Handbook, Washington, DC: US Department of Defense; 1988.
28.
Bellamy R. Contrasts in combat casualty care. Mil Med. 1985;150:405–410.
29.
Winslow G. The concept of triage in modern medicine. In: Triage and Justice: The Ethics of Rational Life-Saving
Medical Resources. Berkeley: University of California Press; 1982: 1–11.
30.
US Department of the Army. Health Service Support in a Theater of Operations. Washington, DC: DA; 1 March
1991. Field Manual 8-10.
31.
Swann SW. Euthanasia on the battlefield. Mil Med. 1987;152:545–549.
32.
The NIV Study Bible: New International Version. Grand Rapids: Zondervan Bible Publishers; 1985.
33.
Pare A. The Apologie and Treatise of Ambroise Pare (Containing the Voyages Made Into Divers Places With Many of His
Writings Upon Surgery). Keynes G, ed. London: Falcon Educational Books; 1951.
Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The Crucible of Military Medical Ethics
401
34.
Wilson R. A Medico-Literary Causerie. Euthanasia. Practitioner. 1896:56:131–135. Reprinted in Risner SJ. The dilemma of euthanasia in modern medical history: The English and American experience. In: The Dilemma of
Euthanasia. New York: Anchor Press; 1975: 27–41.
35.
Peterson RKD. Insects, Disease, and Military History: The Napoleonic Campaigns and Historical Perception.
Reprinted from American Entomologist. 41:147–160. Available at: http://entomology.unl.edu/history_bug/
napoleon/plague_syria.htm. Accessed 31 January 2002.
36.
Keneally T. Schindler’s List. New York: Simon & Schuster; 1982.
37.
Southby RF. Military health care in the 21st century. Mil Med. 1993;158(10):637–640.
38.
Edelstein L. In: Temkin O, Temkin CL, eds, Temkin CL, trans. Ancient Medicine: Selected Papers of Ludwig Edelstein.
Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins Press; 1967.
39.
Sheldon T. Holland decriminalises voluntary euthanasia. Br Med J. 2001;322(7292):947.
40.
Gomez, CF. Regulating Death: Euthanasia and the Case of the Netherlands. New York: The Free Press; 1991.
41.
van der Wal G. Evaluation of the notification procedure for physician-assisted death in the Netherlands. N
Engl J Med. 1996;335(22):1706–1711.
42.
Keown J. On regulating death. Hastings Cent Rep. 1992;22(2):39–43.
43.
van der Maas PJ. Euthanasia and other medical decisions concerning the end of life. Lancet. 1991;338:669–674.
44.
van der Maas PJ. Euthanasia, physician-assisted suicide, and other medical practices involving the end of life
in the Netherlands, 1990–1995. N Engl J Med. 1996:335(22):1699–1705.
45.
Fenigsen R. A case against Dutch euthanasia. Hastings Cent Rep. 1989;19(1):S22–S30.
46.
Walzer M. Just and Unjust Wars. New York: Basic Books; 1992.
47.
AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Code of Medical Ethics: Current Opinions With Annotations. Chicago: American Medical Association;1994.
48.
Weiner DB. The real Doctor Guillotin. JAMA. April 3, 1972:220(1):85–89.
49.
Proctor R. Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1988.
50.
British Medical Association. Involvement of doctors in torture: Conclusions and recommendations. Lancet.
1986;1(8481):628–629.
51.
Knoll E, Lundberg GD. Toward the prevention of torture. JAMA. June 13, 1986:255(22):3157.
52.
Murton T. Prison doctors. In: Visscher MB, ed. Humanistic Perspectives in Medical Ethics. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus
Books; 1972: 248–249.
53.
Fine JE. Torture in Israel and the Occupied Territories. Lancet. 1993:342:169.
54.
Siegel-Itzkovich J. Israeli doctors banned from role in interrogation. Br Med J. 1993:307:(6897):150–151.
55.
Mamode N. Torture and war: Medical associations should try to stop torture in Israel. Br Med J. 1996:312(7022):57.
56.
Torture in Brazil: A Report of the Archdiocese of Sao Paulo. New York: Vintage Books; 1986.
57.
Sagan LA, Jonsen A. Medical ethics and torture. N Engl J Med. 1976:294(26):1427–1430.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
402
58.
Nightingale EO, Hannibal K, Geiger HJ, Hartmann L, Lawrence R, Spurlock J. Apartheid medicine: Health and
human rights in South Africa. JAMA. 1990:264(16):2097–2102.
59.
Haritos-Fatouros M. The official torturer: A learning model for obedience to the authority of violence. J Appl
Soc Psychol. 1998:18(13):1107–1120.
60.
Adapted from case for discussion. Ethics course for MS II. USUHS. 5 September 1995.
61.
US Departments of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps. Enemy Prisoners of War, Retained
Personnel, Civilian Internees and Other Detainees. Washington, DC: DA; 1 October 1997. Army Regulation 190-8,
OPNAVINST 3461. 6, AFJI 31-304, MCO 3461. 1.
62.
Lieutenant Colonel Kim Marley. Personal Communication, 2002.
63.
Gault WB. Some remarks on slaughter. Am J Psychiatry. 1971;128(4):450–454.
64.
Pruitt BA Jr. Trauma care in war and peace: The Army/AAST synergism: 1992 Fitts Lecture. J Trauma.
1993;35(1):78–87.
