Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
739
Chapter 23
MILITARY MEDICINE IN WAR: THE
GENEVA CONVENTIONS TODAY
LEWIS C. VOLLMAR, JR, MD, MA (LAW)*
INTRODUCTION
THE EVOLUTION OF THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS
MEDICAL PERSONNEL AND THEIR PATIENTS
Definition of Wounded and Sick
Definition of Medical Personnel
Rights of Medical Personnel
Retention of Medical Personnel
MEDICAL UNITS, MEDICAL TRANSPORTS, AND THEIR IDENTIFICATION
The Distinctive Emblem
Medical Transports
Medical Units
MEDICAL ETHICS: PROVIDING A GUIDELINE FOR MEDICAL CARE IN WAR
RESPONSIBILITIES OF MEDICAL PERSONNEL
In Combat Theaters
In Occupied Territories
Refraining From Prohibited Acts
CONCLUSION
ATTACHMENTS: INTERNATIONAL GUIDANCE ON HUMANITARIAN CARE
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, United States Army Reserve; formerly, Commander, 21st General Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri; currently,
Dermatology Section Chief, St. Anthony’s Hospital, 10004 Kennerly Road, Suite 300, St. Louis, Missouri 63128-2175
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
740
Joseph Hirsch
Even the Enemy Gets Medical Attention
circa 1943
Although a Marine guard is stationed at the door, this Japanese prisoner with malaria is accorded the same civil,
careful treatment given our own sick men. Area Naval Hospital, Pearl Harbor. Gift of Abbott Laboratories.
Art: Courtesy of Navy Art Collection, Department of the Navy, Naval Historical Center, Washington Navy Yard,
Washington DC. Available at: http://www.history.navy.mil/mil/ac/medica/88159fs.jpg.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
741
INTRODUCTION
speed their recovery. To achieve this effect, the conventions mandate that the wounded and sick be cared
for by medical personnel. To carry out this mandate,
medical personnel and their equipment are granted
extensive protections that are denied other personnel
and other equipment. The humanitarian law affording these protections has evolved gradually over time,
and is still evolving today.
The purpose of international humanitarian law is
to regulate warfare in order to attenuate hardship.
The branch of that law referred to as the law of Geneva
is concerned with the victims of war, military personnel placed hors de combat, and persons not taking part
in the hostilities. 1 As codified within the Geneva Conventions, extensive protections are granted especially
to the wounded and sick, to reduce their suffering and
THE EVOLUTION OF THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS
Essentially every civilization has placed some
limitations on its conduct of warfare. From the
study of ancient civilizations and their rules of warfare it becomes evident that certain common themes
were present: (a) certain weapons were outlawed,
(b) wanton destruction was to be avoided, and (c)
prisoners and noncombatants were to be spared.
Although these limitations on the conduct of warfare were sometimes violated, they were followed
for the most part. And because these limitations
were similar from culture to culture and relatively
consistent over recorded history, they were the custom and gradually evolved into a set of customary
laws of war. 2–7
It was not until the 17th century and the wars of
Louis XIV that medical services were regularly accompanying troops in the field. It was at this same
time that arrangements were first being made between opposing commanders for the reciprocal care
of the wounded and sick and for the protection of
hospitals and medical staff. These arrangements
were strictly ad hoc, for they were not proposed
before a conflict began and they were without status once the conflict ended. 8
During the late 18th and early 19th centuries customary rules began to be codified into binding,
multilateral, international agreements, referred to
as “conventions.”2 On a number of occasions the
need was expressed for a convention to address the
specific problem of how to treat the wounded and
sick. 8 This idea was given particular emphasis by
Henry Dunant (Figure 23-1), who had been present
at the Battle of Solferino during the Franco-Austrian
War of 1859. The suffering and lack of care of the
wounded and sick prompted him to write Un Souvenir de Solférino, which was published in 1862. 9 In
his book he urged that two events occur. The first
of these was the establishment of voluntary “relief
societies for the purpose of having care given to the
wounded in wartime.”9(p115) To this end, Dunant and
four other Swiss citizens (the “Committee of Five”)
formed the International Standing Commission for
Aid to Wounded Soldiers, which later changed its
name to the International Committee of the Red
Fig. 23-1. Henry Dunant. For his efforts in establishing
the Red Cross movement and developing the Geneva
Convention of 1864, Henry Dunant was awarded the first
Nobel Peace Prize in 1901. Reproduced with permission
from the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
742
Cross (ICRC), and set about the task of encouraging
the establishment of National Red Cross Societies
throughout the world.
The second was the formulation of an “international principle, sanctioned by a Convention inviolate in character,”9(p126) that would serve as a basis
and support for the relief societies. In 1863 Dunant
and his committee organized a conference in
Geneva to which several European nations sent
their representatives. The conference recommended
that national relief societies be set up, and asked
the governments to give them their protection and
support. 10 Additionally, the conference recommended that wartime belligerents extend similar
protections to field hospitals, medical personnel,
and the wounded. In response to these recommendations, the Swiss government convened a diplomatic conference in Geneva in 1864. This conference
drew up the Convention for the Amelioration of the
Condition of the Wounded in Armies in the Field,
the first Geneva Convention,11 which was signed by
12 European nations (Figure 23-2) and adopted by
almost all the nations in the years that followed (the
United States ratified the convention in 1882). Although it contained only 10 short articles, this convention expressed all of the important provisions
necessary for the care of the wounded and sick and
for the protection of the medical services. It was
largely reflective of the customary practices of the
time, yet it was the first document to place these
customs into conventional form. 12–14
During the next century the Geneva Convention
underwent several revisions (in 1906, 1929, 1949,
and 1977). These revisions were designed to align
the conventions with modern technologies, customs, and methods of warfare. The use of mobile
medical units led to the development of articles in
the conventions distinguishing them from fixed
medical facilities. The invention of the airplane and
helicopter led to entire sections dealing with their
use as medical transports. And the increasing involvement of civilians as victims of war led to an
Fig. 23-2. Signing of Geneva Convention. Painting by Armand-Dumaresq depicting the signing of the Geneva Convention on 22 August 1864. The original document was signed by 12 European nations: the Swiss Confederation,
Baden, Belgium, Denmark, Spain, France, Hesse, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Prussia, and Württemberg. Reproduced with permission from the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
743
entire convention dealing with their protection.
Also, the conventions were revised in response to
war crimes in an attempt to increase the observance
of their provisions. The illegal, commercial use of
the Red Cross emblem led to provisions banning
all unauthorized uses. The sinking of hospital ships
by submarines and bombers led to provisions to
better protect them. And the heinous Nazi experimentation on human subjects led to provisions
strictly prohibiting such activity and punishing the
violators. 2,14–23 But, perhaps the most remarkable
change in the Geneva Conventions has been in their
length, starting with 10 short articles in 1864 and
expanding to over 600 articles in the four 1949
Geneva Conventions and the two 1977 Additional
Protocols. Yet, throughout all of these changes, the
basic humanitarian principle, which guided the
writing of the very first of the Geneva Conventions,
has never changed. The only purpose of the Geneva
Conventions is to protect the victims of war, especially the wounded and sick. It must be borne in
mind by medical personnel that the sole intent of
their own protections and privileges is specifically
and only for the benefit of the wounded and sick,
to reduce their suffering and to speed their recovery.
The conventions currently in effect are the
Geneva Conventions drafted in 1949 (Geneva 1949),
which deal with the wounded and sick on land
(Geneva I),24 the wounded, sick, and shipwrecked
at sea (Geneva II),25 prisoners of war (Geneva III),26
and civilian populations (Geneva IV). 27 These four
conventions are the ones that are currently observed
by the United States and that enumerate the duties
and rights of medical personnel and the protection
of medical units and transports. 28–30 The four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 have been adopted by
essentially every nation (with a few minor exceptions). 31 In 1977 two protocols were added to the
Geneva Conventions, Protocol I dealing with international armed conflict32 and Protocol II dealing
with noninternational armed conflict. 33 The protocols have been accepted by the majority of the
world’s nations;30 however, the United States has
ratified neither. Protocol II has been submitted to
the Senate for ratification, but Protocol I has not, due
to serious concerns about some of its provisions. 34–40
Protocol I is being reexamined by the United States
for possible ratification with reservations. 41 But, the
sections dealing with the provision of care to the
wounded and sick and the duties and rights of
medical personnel, medical units, and medical
transports are generally noncontroversial in nature
in that they merely attempt to clarify and expand
on the already widely accepted provisions of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949.
In the following discussion of those duties and
rights of which military medical personnel should
be aware, language from the protocols may be used
for the sake of clarity. Where significant differences
are found to exist between the protocols and Geneva
1949, these differences will be pointed out. It also
should be pointed out that the obligations imposed
by the Geneva Conventions are almost exclusively
those that belligerents are called upon to assume
for the benefit of enemy nationals; only rarely do
the conventions mandate that belligerents are to
take specific measures on behalf of their own
wounded and sick.
MEDICAL PERSONNEL AND THEIR PATIENTS
All military medical personnel must remember
that the Geneva Conventions were written to alleviate the suffering of the victims of war, especially
the wounded and sick, and any rights and privileges granted to military medical personnel by the
Geneva Conventions are specifically for the benefit
of those wounded and sick. However, not every
soldier, sailor, and citizen is included under the
protective umbrella of “wounded and sick,” nor is
every healthcare provider necessarily one of the
“medical personnel.” Furthermore, the rights and
privileges of medical personnel are detailed and
specific.
Definition of Wounded and Sick
The primary duty of medical personnel is to care
for the wounded and sick. But who constitutes the
“wounded and sick” is a question with an evolving
answer. Since the beginning, the Geneva Conventions have granted special protections to members
of the armed forces who were hors de combat because
of injury or illness. Geneva 1864 used the term “soldiers” when referring to whom care must be given. 11
The Geneva Convention of 1906 and The Hague
Convention of 1907 expanded the category to “officers,” “soldiers,” “sailors,” and “other persons officially attached” to the army or navy. 42,43 Wounded
and sick civilians were not included. At the time
this was probably adequate because civilians were
generally regarded as outside the struggle and the
vast majority of all casualties of war were combatants. Since the early part of the 20th century an expansion has occurred in the use of irregular warfare. During World War II the Axis Powers refused
to regard irregular troops, or “partisans,” as being
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
744
regular combatants entitled to protection under the
Geneva Conventions. Therefore, primarily to define
who was entitled to prisoner of war status, Geneva
1949 expanded the category of protected persons
(and, hence, entitled to medical care) to include irregular combatants. 24,26 World War II also clearly
demonstrated that civilians were no longer outside
the struggle. Therefore, Geneva IV was drafted,
extending protections to civilians. In it civilian
wounded and sick are made the object of protection and respect, but they are not granted the same
access to medical care as wounded and sick soldiers. 27 Following World War II, the increasing concern over civilian victims of war, and the further
blurring of the distinction between civilians and
combatants created by the proliferation of guerrilla
warfare, led to a further expansion of the definition of “wounded and sick” in the 1977 Protocols
to encompass all persons wounded and sick, civilians and soldiers alike. 32
The definition Protocol I uses for “wounded and
sick” is “persons, whether military or civilian, who,
because of trauma, disease or other physical or
mental disorder or disability, are in need of medical assistance or care and who refrain from any act
of hostility.”32 Therefore, the term includes not just
the wounded and sick in the usual sense, but also
expectant mothers, maternity cases, newborn babies, and invalids—those whose condition may at
any moment necessitate immediate medical care or
who are in such a state of weakness that special
medical consideration is demanded. But not included in the term are those who are not refraining
from acts of hostility. A person with a broken leg
who continues to fire his rifle is not considered
wounded or sick by this definition, and to him no
duty of care is owed by medical personnel until he
surrenders. Indeed, medical personnel have every
right to even inflict harm upon him if it is necessary to defend themselves or their patients.
The United States has not yet ratified the protocols; therefore, the behavior of medical personnel
of the United States armed forces is governed by
only Geneva 1949. If one interprets its provisions
strictly, medical personnel are obligated to treat
only the wounded and sick of the armed forces,
those accompanying the armed forces, and those in
resistance movements, but not civilians. 24,25 However,
it is instructive to review what Jean Pictet has to say
regarding the care of civilians in his widely respected
commentary on the 1949 Geneva Conventions:
In virtue of a humanitarian principle, universally
recognized in international law, of which the Geneva
Conventions are merely the practical expression,
any wounded or sick person whatever, even a franctireur [terrorist] or a criminal, is entitled to respect
and humane treatment and the care which his condition requires. Even civilians, when they are
wounded or sick, have the benefit of humanitarian
safeguards (as embodied in Part II of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949) very similar to those
which the First Convention prescribes in the case
of members of the armed forces; and the applicability of these safeguards is quite general….Article
13 cannot therefore in any way entitle a belligerent
to refrain from respecting a wounded person, or to
deny him the requisite treatment, even where he
does not belong to one of the categories specified
in the Article. Any wounded person, whoever he
may be, must be treated by the enemy in accordance
with the Geneva Convention. 44(pp145–146)
Both Pictet and Protocol I apply a more liberal standard when defining who is entitled to care in the
military medical care system. This is especially true
of Protocol I, which seems to imply that military
medical facilities should open their doors to everyone seeking care. It is easy to envision how quickly
they would be overwhelmed in such a situation,
especially if the level of care offered by the military
medical establishment is much higher than that of
the peacetime civilian community. Therefore, if the
United States does eventually submit Protocol I to
the Senate for ratification, it will be with the understanding that military hospitals are intended for
the treatment of military wounded and sick; treatment for civilian wounded and sick will be required
only when the United States is occupying foreign
territory and the civilian healthcare community is
unable to care for its own. However, if a civilian
does enter the military medical care system, under
whatever circumstance, he will then be treated no
differently than anyone else. 41
Definition of Medical Personnel
Protocol I defines medical personnel as “those
persons assigned, by a Party to the conflict, exclusively to the medical purposes enumerated….or to the
administration of medical units or to the operation
or administration of medical transports.” The medical purposes enumerated include “the search for,
collection, transportation, diagnosis or treatment—
including first-aid treatment—of the wounded, sick
and shipwrecked, or for the prevention of disease.”32
Thus, the term “medical personnel” is not to be interpreted narrowly. It encompasses all personnel
who are required to ensure the adequate treatment
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
745
of the wounded and sick. Obviously included are
those who give direct care, such as doctors, nurses,
orderlies, and stretcher bearers. Also included are
those who are not direct caregivers, but who are
necessary for the provision of medical care, such as
office staff, pharmacists, cooks, ambulance drivers,
pilots and crews of medical transports, and maintenance personnel attached to medical units. Together all of these personnel form the medical service of the armed forces and all are afforded special protections.
In order for these medical personnel to receive
special protections they must be “exclusively” assigned to and engaged in medical activities. Protected medical personnel may not be involved in
other activities as long as they are assigned to perform medical tasks. For instance, they may not abuse
their special protections by engaging in commercial activities, and they certainly may not engage
in military operations that are not of an humanitarian nature. This does not mean that medical personnel are prohibited from ever becoming fighting
combatants—there are examples of this throughout
history (eg, Che Guevara and General Leonard
Wood). However, in doing so they lose their special
protections under the Geneva Conventions.
The protocol also stipulates that medical personnel must be “assigned by a Party to the conflict.” A
military doctor under military orders while performing his medical mission would certainly fulfill
this criterion. Additionally, personnel of voluntary
aid and national Red Cross societies that have been
authorized by the government to render aid would
also meet this requirement. However, not included
would be the individual physician working on his
own. Medical personnel must perform their duties
in the framework of some organization that is under
the control of the government. During the drafting
of the protocols, a proposal was made to provide
for the protection of the individual, independent
physician wearing a special emblem, the Staff of Aesculapius. However, the proposal was not successful. 45
Finally, in order to be protected, medical personnel must comply with the provisions of the Geneva
Conventions, whether or not those provisions are
part of their national legislation or military regulations and whether or not the enemy is following
the requirements of the Geneva Conventions. Disobeying the provisions is a breach of law and subjects the individual to punishment. Therefore, it behooves medical personnel to be familiar with the
duties demanded of them, as well as the rights
granted to them under international humanitarian
law.
Rights of Medical Personnel
In order to assist medical personnel in carrying
out their duty to care for the wounded and sick, they
are granted certain rights and privileges under the
Geneva Conventions. Medical personnel are not allowed under any circumstances to renounce these
rights. 24–26 This prohibition is intended to prevent
pressure being applied to medical personnel forcing
them to renounce their rights and ultimately adversely affecting their care of the wounded and sick.
The primary right of medical personnel is that
they must be respected and protected under all circumstances. 24,25,27,32,33 This is the classic formula (discussed below in the section entitled Caring for the
Wounded and Sick). Department of the Army Field
Manual 27-10 discusses this right in the following
way:
[Medical personnel] must not knowingly be attacked, fired upon, or unnecessarily prevented
from discharging their proper functions. The accidental killing or wounding of such personnel, due
to their presence among or in proximity to combatant elements actually engaged, by fire directed
at the latter, gives no just cause for complaint. 28(p89)
Medical personnel can be killed accidentally because they are assigned to units that are legitimate
military targets, or assigned to medical units that
are near legitimate military targets. Their right to
respect and protection does not shield them from
unintentional harm in these circumstances.
Not only have medical personnel the duty to care
for the wounded and sick, they have the right to do
so, also. Likewise, not only do they have the duty
to render that care according to the dictates of medical ethics, they have the right to do so (see the section titled Medical Ethics). These rights are directly
associated with the duty all belligerents have to
provide medical care to enemy wounded and sick,
and to allow medical personnel to provide that care
according to the dictates of medical ethics.
The protocols allow medical personnel to withhold information regarding the wounded and sick
under their care if that information would prove to
be harmful to their patients or their patients’ families. 32,33 This provision is not concerned with medical confidentiality, that is, the duty that medical
personnel have not to discuss with third parties the
state of health or treatment of their patients. Rather,
this provision deals with the denouncing of, or informing on, wounded members of enemy forces or
resistance movements. It is most likely to concern
civilian doctors treating patients in occupied terriMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
746
tories. It arose out of the experience of World War
II when occupying forces ordered the inhabitants
of occupied territories to reveal the presence of any
presumed enemy or face severe punishment. Those
drafting the protocols felt that, without a provision
of this sort, wounded and sick enemy soldiers in
hiding would not seek out medical care. 46 Whether
or not to denounce a patient is left up to the conscience of the medical person involved. He cannot
be compelled to denounce his patients, although he
is under no obligation not to do so. However, there
are two exceptions to this rule: (1) a belligerent may
compel its own nationals to give information on
their patients, whether they are friend or enemy,
and (2) “enemy” medical personnel may be required
to notify authorities regarding the presence of any
communicable diseases for obvious reasons of public health.
Retention of Medical Personnel
Medical personnel who fall into enemy hands are
treated differently from other military personnel.
Geneva 1864 and Geneva 1906 both provided that
medical personnel were not to be treated as prisoners of war, but were to be sent back to their own
side as soon they were no longer indispensable for
the care of the wounded currently under their care.
But in World War I this provision was applied differently than intended, in that medical personnel
were generally retained to care for prisoners of war.
Geneva 1929 reiterated the principle that medical
personnel were to be repatriated, but added the
qualifying statement “unless there is an agreement
to the contrary.” Unfortunately Geneva 1929 did not
sufficiently specify how medical personnel were to
be treated in the event of retention. Consequently,
in World War II repatriation of medical personnel
was a relatively rare event, and retained medical
personnel were often used in nonmedical work and
otherwise considered prisoners of war. During the
debate leading to the development of the 1949
Geneva Conventions two separate opinions were
expressed concerning the status of medical personnel. One side favored a prisoner-of-war status for
medical personnel, although, while in captivity,
they would care for the wounded and sick prisoners of war. The other side favored a non–prisonerof-war status, thereby giving medical personnel
additional liberty and prestige, which would help
them in providing care to the wounded and sick.
The 1949 Geneva Conventions adopted the latter
position, wherein captured medical personnel are
not prisoners of war, yet are retained. 44
Medical personnel may be retained, but “only in
so far as the state of health….and the number of prisoners of war require [it].” The retention of medical
personnel must be justified by a significant, immediate need. The number of retained medical personnel is to be determined by the number of prisoners
of war, and the ratio between the two may be decided by special agreement between belligerents. 24
As it always has been throughout the development
of the Geneva Conventions, retention of medical
personnel remains subordinate to their repatriation.
But, if history is any indication of the future, it is
likely that retention will become the rule and repatriation will remain the exception.
Although retained medical personnel are not
considered prisoners of war, at the very least they
are to receive all the benefits and privileges of prisoner-of-war status. While in a retained status, medical personnel must be allowed to continue, without hindrance, their work of caring for the wounded
and sick prisoners of war, preferably of their own
nationality. They must be supplied with the necessary facilities and supplies to do their work. They
cannot be required to do any work outside their
medical duties, such as administration and upkeep
of the camp to which they are assigned, even if they
have nothing better to do. However, it must be realized that the term “medical duties” must be interpreted broadly to include such work as administration and upkeep of a hospital or clinic in which
the medical personnel are working. Retained medical personnel must be allowed to visit periodically
the prisoners of war in labor units or hospitals outside the camp, and they must be supplied with the
necessary transportation to do so. Obviously, as
with prisoners of war, medical personnel cannot
have complete freedom of movement, and they remain subject to the rules and regulations of their
captor. Professionally, they remain subject to their
captor’s administrative control. Yet, their captor’s
authority ends where questions of medical ethics
begin. Thus, a physician cannot be prevented from
treating a sick person, or be forced to apply a treatment detrimental to a person’s health. There may
be some give and take in this regard, because what
is considered acceptable medical treatment may
vary among nations and among physicians. The
fundamental rule laid down by the Geneva Conventions is that the captor must care for the enemy
wounded and sick as well as he does his own. 24,26
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
747
MEDICAL UNITS, MEDICAL TRANSPORTS, AND THEIR IDENTIFICATION
It is impossible to protect the wounded and sick
without also protecting the medical transports and
medical units that move and house them. Therefore,
the Geneva Conventions have provided for their
protection as well. As with protections afforded
medical personnel, the protections extended to
medical transports and medical units are specifically for the benefit of the wounded and sick.
The Distinctive Emblem
In order to protect medical personnel, medical
transports, hospitals, and patients, some means of
quick and sure identification is necessary. This need
led to the adoption of the red cross (and the red
crescent) as the distinctive emblem of the medical
service.
Historical Development
Before 1864 each State had its own distinctive flag
for marking its hospitals and ambulances on the
battlefield. Henry Dunant and his Committee of
Five recognized the need for a single emblem by
which all of the medical services would be recognized. As a compliment to Switzerland, the red cross
on a white background (the opposite of the Swiss
flag) was proposed and adopted at the first Geneva
Convention. The hope that this would become a
universal symbol lasted only until 1876 when Turkey, which had accepted Geneva 1864 without reservation, announced that its medical service would
use the red crescent and not the red cross as its distinctive emblem, because the red cross, resembling
the Christian cross, was offensive to Moslem soldiers. When the Geneva Convention was revised in
1906, the adoption of the red cross emblem was confirmed without exceptions, yet Turkey added a reservation that it would use the red crescent instead
of the red cross. Finally, in 1929 during the second
revision of the Geneva Convention, the use of the
red crescent (by Turkey and Egypt) and the use of
the red lion and sun (by Persia) were given official
recognition. 47
During the debates leading to the adoption of the
1949 Conventions, the Israeli delegation proposed
that the Red Shield of David (a red, six-pointed star
on a white background) should be recognized. The
conference considering this proposal narrowly rejected this new emblem in a desire to limit the number of exceptions to the use of the red cross. It realized that recognizing this emblem would open the
floodgates to a great many additional emblems, including the flame, shrine, bow, palm, wheel, trident,
cedar, and mosque, all of which had already been
submitted by various nations to the ICRC for international recognition. Israel accepted the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, but with a reservation that it would
continue to use the Red Shield of David as its distinctive emblem. 44
The desire for a single, universal symbol remains
strong. Proposals have been made to introduce a
new symbol that would be acceptable to all. However, the red cross is probably the most widely recognized symbol of any sort throughout the world,
and building that kind of recognition for any other
symbol would be difficult. Therefore, the red cross
remains the distinctive emblem of the medical service, with the two exceptions of the red crescent and
the red lion and sun (Figure 23-3). Several Moslem
states are currently using the red crescent, but the
red lion and sun has fallen into disuse. Military
personnel should also expect to see the use of the
Red Shield of David denoting the medical service
of the Israeli military (Figure 23-4). And, although
the Red Shield of David is not one of the emblems
specifically mentioned in the Geneva Conventions,
medical personnel and medical equipment displaying it should be accorded the same protections and
privileges as medical personnel and medical equipment displaying the red cross or the red crescent.
Protective vs Indicative Sign
There are two fundamentally different uses of the
red cross (or red crescent) emblem that are authorized by the Geneva Conventions. 24,25 The first and
most important is as the distinctive emblem of the
medical service. As such it is used to mark facilities, equipment, supplies, means of transport, and
personnel to show that they are part of the medical
service and protected by the Geneva Conventions.
Used as a protective sign, the red cross emblem
should be large relative to the person or object it
protects so that it can be easily seen. Belligerents
have a clear interest in seeing that their protected
personnel and objects are easily recognizable by the
enemy, and they must “endeavor” to ensure that
recognition takes place. 32 However, there is no obligation on the part of the belligerent to ensure recMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
748
ognition; it is not a violation of the conventions if
medical personnel, units, or transports are not
marked with the distinctive emblem, it is merely
risky. A field commander may wish to camouflage
his medical units in front line positions in order to
conceal the strength and position of his forces. But
a medical unit can be respected by an enemy only
if he knows of its presence. Once the enemy does
recognize medical personnel, units, or transports for
what they are, he must respect them regardless of
whether or not they are properly marked.
The distinctive emblem provides good visual
identification of medical activities. Today, primarily in the case of medical personnel, the red cross
still provides good identification and is likely to be
protective. For personnel, the conventions allow the
red cross is to be worn as an armlet or brassard on
the left arm. Also, medical personnel are entitled to
carry a special identification card bearing the red
cross. 24 Neither of these means of identification may
be confiscated by the enemy, and medical personnel are entitled to wear the armlet and carry the
identification card even when retained. In the case
of medical units and transports, the red cross emblem may not be as effective as it needs to be. At
one time purely visual recognition of a medical unit
or transport was enough to prevent attack, but
modern, long-range combat has rendered purely
visual means of identification inadequate. Therefore, Protocol I has introduced a technical means of
long-range distinctive signals using light, radio, and
radar signals. Belligerents are not required to use
these special signals, but are encouraged to do so.
In general, a transport or unit may not use a special
signal without also displaying the red cross. 32
The second use of the red cross emblem is as a
purely indicatory sign to show that the person or
object marked with it is connected with the National
Red Cross (or Red Crescent) Society without implying protection under the Geneva Conventions. In
general, as an indicatory sign the red cross should
be relatively small compared to the person or object so as not to be confused with the red cross used
as a protective sign. Although originally conceived
as providing support to the military medical service during wartime, the Red Cross has taken on
new roles. During peacetime, the Red Cross provides blood collection and distribution, disaster
relief, and other welfare activities. During wartime,
the Red Cross may provide such nonmedical services as sending parcels to personnel at the front,
organizing recreation for the troops, and helping
the families of soldiers. All of these activities, which
certainly do much to enhance the respect for the
red cross emblem in general, are done under the
indicatory sign. Only if the Red Cross actually provides wartime medical support to the military medical service and is under its control (in effect, part of
the military medical service) is it entitled to use the
red cross emblem as a protective sign. In this case
Fig. 23-3. Medical service emblems. The distinctive emblems of the medical service recognized by the Geneva
Conventions: the red cross, red crescent, and red lion and
sun, each appearing on a white background.
Fig. 23-4. The Red Shield of David. Although this emblem is not officially recognized by the Geneva Conventions, it is nonetheless one that service members may
encounter.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
749
the Red Cross personnel, units, and transports
would probably wish to use the larger, more easily
recognizable, protective red cross emblem rather
than the smaller emblem that is allowed when the
red cross is used strictly as an indicatory sign.
Abuses of the Distinctive Emblem
Abuses of the red cross emblem are as old as the
emblem itself. As with uses of the red cross, a distinction needs to be made between abuses of the
protective sign and abuses of the indicatory sign.
In time of war the first is by far the more serious.
This type of abuse may be relatively minor, such as
the wearing of the red cross by an independent physician who is not a member of the medical service,
or major, such as the deliberate marking of an ammunition dump with the red cross to deceive the
enemy. The tragedy of misusing the red cross in this
manner is that it causes the enemy to suspect all
uses of the red cross to the detriment of the
wounded and sick that it is designed to protect.
Fortunately, abuses of this type are relatively uncommon.
More common, although of a less serious nature,
have been abuses of the red cross as an indicatory
sign. Soon after international acceptance of the
Geneva Conventions, the red cross was in widespread
commercial use, being used by chemists, manufacturers, and even barbers. In 1906 the Geneva Convention was modified to prevent abuses in general. 42
Geneva 1929 specifically mentioned commercial
abuses, although it left the specific prohibition to
national legislation. 47 Finally, Geneva 1949 prohibited all misuses of the red cross emblem or imitations thereof, and it required all nations to take the
necessary measures to prevent and repress these
abuses. 24
Medical Transports
Medical transports include all means of conveyance, whether by land, sea, or air, that are used for
the purpose of transporting wounded, sick, shipwrecked, medical personnel, or medical material.
The assignment of a means of transportation to
medical transport may be permanent or temporary
in nature (except for hospital ships), yet this assignment must be exclusive; a means of transportation
may not be used for purposes other than medical
transportation for as long as it is assigned to do so.
The immunity of medical transports is the same as
for medical units and medical personnel. They must
be “respected” and “protected.” As with medical
units, medical transports may not be used for acts
that are considered harmful to the enemy and outside their normal humanitarian uses. A medical
convoy carrying both wounded and able-bodied
soldiers or arms, for example, would lose its protections to the detriment of the wounded. However,
the presence of arms that have just been taken from
the wounded and not yet turned over to the proper
authorities would be permitted. Also, the fact that
the medical personnel on board the transport are
armed with small arms, or that the transport may
be carrying wounded and sick civilians, will not
deprive the transport of its protections.
The disposal of a medical transport if it should
be captured by the enemy depends upon the nature of the transport. Vehicles that are used on roads,
rails, or inland waterways are subject to the laws of
war. They become the property of the captor and
may be used for any purpose desired, even a military, nonmedical purpose (assuming, of course, that
the protective emblem has been removed). Before
the captor may convert a medical vehicle, he must
ensure the care of the wounded and sick that are
being carried by the vehicle. The captured wounded
and sick become prisoners of war and the captured
medical personnel are retained. 24,25,32
Medical Aircraft
Medical aircraft flying over enemy territory or
close to enemy lines can be given a summons to land
by the enemy to undergo an inspection. The purpose of the inspection is to verify that the aircraft is
being used in compliance with the Geneva Conventions. The pilot must obey this summons, for refusing to do so puts the aircraft at risk and allows the
enemy to legally open fire on it. The examination
of the aircraft must be conducted expeditiously so
that any wounded and sick on board will not suffer
needlessly, and, if no violations are found, the aircraft must be allowed to continue on its way with
its crew, passengers, and material. If the examination reveals that the aircraft is involved in acts
harmful to the enemy, such as carrying munitions
or being used for military observation, then the aircraft can be seized, the wounded and sick made
prisoners of war, and the medical personnel retained. Because of weather conditions, engine
trouble, or other causes, medical aircraft can also
be forced to land in enemy territory without receiving a summons. In the event of capture under these
circumstances, the aircraft can also be seized. According to Geneva 1949, any seized medical aircraft
becomes war booty. 24,25 Protocol I changes this provision such that any aircraft seized that had been
assigned as a permanent medical transport may be
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
750
used only as a medical transport by the captor. 32
Medical aircraft also have certain operational
limits placed upon them. These regulations have
undergone a significant evolution during the development of the Geneva Conventions mostly because of rapid technological change in aircraft design and practical considerations on the battlefield.
World War I was the first conflict in which medical
aircraft were used to any great extent. Therefore,
Geneva 1929 was the first to contain provisions regarding medical aircraft. Without agreement with
the enemy, medical aircraft were prohibited from
flying forward of the position of the medical clearing station. 47 Unfortunately, because of the difficulty
in recognizing medical aircraft before attacking
them, this provision did not prove effective in protecting medical aircraft during World War II. Therefore, Geneva 1949 provides that medical aircraft are
generally prohibited from flying over enemy territory, and, when they are flying over friendly territory, they are fully protected only while flying according to flight plans agreed upon between
belligerents. 24,25 Protocol I allows medical aircraft
to fly over friendly territory without first securing
agreement approving such flights, although for
additional safety it recommends notifying the enemy. Over contested areas or over enemy territory,
medical aircraft can expect to be protected only if
prior agreement has been reached between the
belligerents. Yet, under any circumstance, once a
medical aircraft is correctly identified by the enemy,
it must be respected. The protocol also contains a
number of provisions intended to ensure the protection of medical aircraft by their rapid identification using distinctive emblems, lights, radio signals,
and electronic signatures. 32
Hospital Ships
Hospital ships and coastal rescue craft, unlike
medical vehicles and aircraft, are exempt from capture when operating in compliance with the Geneva
Conventions. However, in order to prevent a hospital ship from interfering with an enemy’s military operations, the enemy may exercise control
over it. This control includes searching the hospital
ship, dictating its course, putting a commissioner
on board, detaining it, or controlling its use of communications equipment. 25 The searching serves the
same purpose as the searching of medical aircraft,
to ensure that the hospital ship is operating in compliance with the Geneva Conventions. The enemy
may dictate its course by refusing its help, ordering it off, or determining its direction and speed.
The purpose of a commissioner on board is to ensure that the hospital ship follows the orders given
it. The enemy may detain a hospital ship, but only
under exceptional circumstances, and this detention
may not exceed 7 days. The time limit, which was
new to Geneva 1949, should prevent abuses such
as the Japanese detention of The Netherlands hospital ship Op ten Noort for 8 months during World
War II. 48 In regard to communication equipment, it
is forbidden at all times for a hospital ship to possess or use secret codes. 25 During World War II, the
German hospital ship Ophelia was legally captured
when its crew threw a code book overboard while
being boarded for inspection. 23 Although it is within
the spirit of the Geneva Conventions that there
should be nothing secret in the behavior of a hospital ship, the need to transmit and receive information in the clear has led to a variety of problems.
For example, in 1982 during the Falklands War between Great Britain and Argentina, all of the
weather information was disseminated in code to
the British fleet. The British hospital ships, unable to
decode this information, were unable to avoid the
severe South Atlantic winter storms. Also, there was
the problem of a warship arranging a rendezvous
with a hospital ship. This was partially solved by
an agreement between Argentina and Great Britain
to designate a “Red Cross Box” north of the islands
where hospital ships could safely take aboard and
exchange the wounded and sick. 49
Not only is a hospital ship exempt from capture
but so are the crew and medical personnel assigned
to it. Therefore, these medical personnel are treated
in a fundamentally different fashion than other
medical personnel. The reason for this is because
exempting a hospital ship from capture without
exempting its crew and personnel would prevent it
from carrying out its mission and would turn it into
a mere derelict. The exemption from capture extends throughout the period of time the crew and
personnel are assigned to the ship, whether or not
they happen to be on board at the time they fall into
enemy hands. Similarly, their immunity from capture may not be suspended even if there happens
not to be any wounded or sick on board. Medical
personnel captured while serving aboard warships
or in situations other than serving aboard hospital
ships can be retained by the enemy. Wounded and
sick aboard hospital ships or other ships become
prisoners of war if captured, but the belligerent capturing them must be able to care for them before
moving them. 25
Hospital ships may be as big or as small as a nation wishes to make them, although, for the comfort and safety of the patients on board, the conventions recommend that they be over 2,000 tons. 25
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
751
This provision, which was new to Geneva 1949, was
included because of Great Britain’s announcement
during World War II that it would refuse to recognize as protected any hospital ship of less than 3,000
tons; their announcement was in response to the
large number of small rescue craft used by Germany
to pick up downed pilots in the immediate vicinity
of Britain’s coastal defenses at a time when invasion by Germany was thought imminent. 23
Ships may be built specifically as hospital ships,
or merchant ships may be converted into hospital
ships. But, once a ship becomes a hospital ship, it
must remain a hospital ship throughout the duration of the hostilities. 25 During World War I it had
been the practice of Great Britain to move merchant
ships in and out of medical service, prompting Germany to torpedo a number of them. 18 Also, there
were instances of hasty conversion of merchant
ships into hospital ships to avoid capture, such as
the German ship Rostock in the besieged port of
Bordeaux in 1944. A rule requiring a 10-day advanced notification before employment of a hospital ship should prevent abuses of this sort. 23 Both
rules should cause fewer attacks on hospital ships
and allow for better protection of the wounded and
sick aboard all hospital ships.
Medical Units
Protocol I defines “medical units” as “establishments and other units, whether military or civilian,
organized for medical purposes, namely the search
for, collection, transportation, diagnosis or treatment—including first-aid treatment—of the
wounded, sick and shipwrecked, or for the prevention of disease.”32 Medical units may be large or
small, fixed or mobile, permanent or temporary.
Included in this definition would be not only hospitals, dental units, and preventive medicine units,
but also blood collection centers, places where
medical supplies are stored, and garages where
medical vehicles are parked or repaired. Thus, the
“medical purpose” to which the unit is assigned
must be interpreted flexibly. However, whatever
medical assignment is made must be performed
exclusively by that unit, whether for an indeterminate period or a limited period of time, in order for
the unit to be considered a medical unit. A hospital
with a large store of munitions in its basement
would not be performing its medical mission exclusively and, consequently, would not be afforded
protections.
The primary right of medical units is the same
as for medical personnel, that they must be respected and protected at all times. 24,27,32,33 This means
that the enemy may not intentionally harm them in
any way or allow them to come to harm without
coming to their aid. This also means that they must
be allowed to carry out their medical mission without interference and with assistance, if required. For
example, the enemy must not prevent the delivery
of medical supplies to a medical unit and, if necessary, must help to ensure the delivery of those supplies. Respect and protection does not mean that a
medical unit cannot be occupied by the enemy, but
it does mean that the wounded and sick, medical
personnel, and medical equipment must be treated
with consideration. Also, if a medical unit is occupied, the enemy must allow the unit to continue its
work, at least until other arrangements have been
made to care for the wounded and sick.
The requirement to respect and protect medical
units does not mean that they may not be harmed
unintentionally. Medical units may suffer collateral
damage caused by attacks directed against legitimate targets, especially during aerial or artillery
bombardments. Therefore, it is the responsibility of
the military authorities to situate medical units in
such a fashion that attacks against military objectives will not imperil their safety. 24,32 This does not
mean that medical units cannot be placed near militarily important targets; at times this will be unavoidable. But, under no circumstances may a medical unit be placed so as to intentionally shield a
military objective with the hope that the enemy will
hesitate to attack the objective for humanitarian
reasons. This would expose the wounded and sick
and other protected personnel to unnecessary risk
of serious harm and would be completely contrary
to the spirit of the Geneva Conventions.
In order to retain their protections, medical units
must not be used to commit acts harmful to the enemy. Such acts would include using a hospital as
housing for uninjured soldiers, as an ammunition
dump, or as an observation post. Another example
would be deliberately placing a mobile medical unit
to impede an enemy attack. In order for a medical
unit to forfeit its protections, the harmful acts must
also be outside the humanitarian duties of the unit.
There are some humanitarian acts that may be
harmful to the enemy, but that do not warrant termination of protections. For example, returning
previously sick soldiers to duty is harmful to the
enemy but within the scope of the humanitarian
activities of a hospital. Another example would be
the use of an x-ray machine that unintentionally
interferes with an enemy’s radio or radar. In the
event that a unit does commit acts that are hostile
and not of a humanitarian nature, before protections
cease, the enemy must warn the unit to put an end
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
752
to its hostile acts within a reasonable time limit. The
length of the time limit is not specified and will vary
with the situation. It must be long enough to allow
compliance with the warning or, at least, to allow
evacuation of the wounded and sick from the unit. 24
Allowable Conditions
There are certain conditions that may be present
that do not deprive a medical unit of its protections. 24 The most important of these is that medical
personnel may carry arms for their own defense and
for the defense of the wounded and sick under their
care. US policy has been that these arms may be
small arms, although heavier weapons might be
allowed under certain circumstances. Medical personnel may only resort to the use of arms for defensive purposes. They must refrain from aggressive action, and they may not use the force of arms
to prevent the capture of their unit by an enemy
showing the proper respect for protected personnel and material.
Although a medical unit may not shelter healthy
soldiers, in the absence of sufficient numbers of
armed medical personnel to ensure the unit’s security, there may be sentries, guards, or armed escorts
who are not normally part of the unit. Their role is
strictly defensive in nature. Members of the veterinary service are also not protected personnel, yet
they and their equipment may be found in a medical unit even though they do not form an integral
part of it. The presence of armed guards or the veterinary service does not diminish the protections
afforded a medical unit. If captured, unlike medical personnel, armed guards and veterinary personnel become prisoners of war.
Medical units may not act as depots for nonauthorized military weapons. However, wounded and
sick soldiers may still be in possession of weapons
when they arrive, which will be taken from them
and stored until they can be turned over to the
proper authorities. The presence of these arms in a
medical unit may not be construed by the enemy
as a breach of the conventions.
A provision added to the 1949 Geneva Conventions
states that medical units cannot be denied protections because they are caring for civilian wounded
and sick. The wounding of civilians in wartime has
become an increasingly greater problem since the
beginning of the 20th century. It is natural that some
of them will find their way to military medical units.
It is entirely consistent with the humanitarian purpose of military medical units to extend care to civilians. It had been the custom prior to 1949, but
the custom had not been officially sanctioned until
then. This provision has its counterpart in Geneva
IV wherein civilian hospitals are authorized to shelter and treat military wounded and sick. 27
The Capture of Medical Units and Material
Geneva 1929 stipulated that mobile military
medical units falling into enemy hands were to be
returned, along with their personnel, as soon as
possible. However, the experience of World War II
demonstrated that repatriation was an unrealistic
goal. Therefore, along with the change from repatriation to retention of medical personnel, Geneva
1949 also provides that mobile medical units can
be retained, but the retained material must be reserved for the care of the wounded and sick.
Unlike mobile medical units, fixed medical establishments remain “subject to the laws of war.”
This means that the movable property may be removed and taken away by the captor and the real
property may be used as needed. This rule is tempered by the fact that the captor must continue to
use the fixed establishment for the benefit of the
wounded and sick as long as it is needed, unless
there is urgent military necessity to use the property otherwise, but then only if provision has been
made for the continued care of the wounded and
sick contained in the facility. Thus, regarding the
capture of fixed medical establishments, military
need is subordinated to humanitarian requirements.
An entirely new provision of the 1949 Conventions states that the material and stores of mobile
or fixed medical units may not be intentionally destroyed. This provision does not confine itself to
protecting medical material against destruction by
the enemy; it also protects the material in cases
where those owning it may be tempted to destroy
it rather than allowing it to fall into enemy hands.
Therefore, if medical personnel are forced to abandon their medical facility, they must either take
medical equipment and other material with them,
or they must leave the facility and its material undamaged for the enemy to capture and use. 24
MEDICAL ETHICS: PROVIDING A GUIDELINE FOR MEDICAL CARE IN WAR
How should medical personnel exercise their
duty to care for the wounded and sick? The 1977
Protocols32(Art16) identify medical ethics as the appropriate guide:
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
753
(1)
Under no circumstances shall any person be
punished for carrying out medical activities
compatible with medical ethics, regardless of
the person benefiting therefrom.
(2)
Persons engaged in medical activities shall not
be compelled to perform acts or to carry out
work contrary to the rules of medical ethics or
to other medical rules designed for the benefit
of the wounded and sick or to the provisions of
the Conventions or of this Protocol, or to refrain
from performing acts or from carrying out work
required by those rules and provisions.
Medical ethics have always been the appropriate
guide implied by the Geneva Conventions to direct
physician behavior on the battlefield, yet it was not
explicitly stated as such until the advent of the 1977
Protocols.
Nowhere in the protocols is the term “medical
ethics” defined. Presumably, the protocols are referring to generally accepted medical ethical principles. There are both international and national
dimensions to these principles. On the one hand,
there are various codes and rules of medical ethics
that are internationally recognized. These would
include the Declaration of Geneva50 (a modern day
Hippocratic Oath), the International Code of Medical Ethics,51 the Regulations in Time of Armed Conflict,52 the Rules Governing the Care of Sick and
Wounded, Particularly in Time of Conflict,53 the
Declaration of Helsinki,54 the Declaration of Tokyo,55
and the Statement on Physician-Assisted Suicide. 56
All of these codes (which are reproduced in the Attachments following the chapter) were adopted by
the World Medical Association, and the rules concerning war and armed conflict were adopted
jointly by the World Medical Association, the International Committee of Military Medicine and
Pharmacy, and the ICRC. The World Medical Association consists of the major medical associations
from around the world, including the American
Medical Association; therefore the various codes
listed have wide acceptance. The essential principle
running through these codes is that medical personnel should always act in the interest of the
wounded or sick person, whoever he is, helping him
to the fullest extent possible, and never taking advantage of his position of relative weakness and
dependence. These are the guiding principles in the
Geneva Conventions and the protocols.
On the other hand, none of these codes has the
force of law, and there are still significant variations
in medical standards from one nation to another.
Therefore, international humanitarian law does not
demand the application of universal standards, but
rather allows nations to apply to the care of the
wounded and sick their own generally recognized
standards of medical ethics. Although there is much
common ground internationally, the concept remains, for now, a national one. 45,46,57,58
Excluded from the concept of medical ethics are
any rules intended for the benefit of the profession
rather than for the benefit of the wounded and sick.
During the drafting of the protocols it was successfully argued that the term “professional ethics”
should be changed to “medical ethics” to exclude
inappropriate rules. As an example, it was pointed
out that some codes of professional ethics prohibit
doctors from cooperating in the performance of
medical procedures by unlicensed personnel. Although such policies might be appropriate in many
communities, it is necessary to use trained paramedical personnel in isolated military units where
no licensed physicians are available. It was felt that
having physicians use “medical ethics” rather than
“professional ethics” as the guide would not prevent physicians from working with and training
such personnel and would, in general, focus attention on the patient rather than on the profession. 59–61
Also excluded are personal codes of medical ethics that are in conflict with national standards. A case
in point is US v. Levy, the court-martial of Captain
Levy, an Army physician during the Vietnam War. Dr.
Levy refused to provide medical training to Special
Forces personnel, contending that they were combat
personnel who would be used to commit war crimes
in Vietnam, and that this was a violation of his concept of medical ethics. The court concluded that a personal concept of medical ethics could not be used as
an excuse to disobey an otherwise lawful order. 62,63
The issue raised in US v. Levy is also the subject
of a reservation proposed by the State Department
to the previously quoted Article 16 of Protocol I and
a very similarly worded Article 10 of Protocol II:
The United States reserves as to Article 10 to the
extent that it would affect the internal administration of the United States Armed Forces, including
the administration of military justice. 64
The State Department has proposed the reservation “to preserve the ability of the US Armed Forces
to control actions of their medical personnel, who
might otherwise feel entitled to invoke these provisions to disregard, under the guise of ‘medical ethics,’ the priorities and restrictions established by
higher authority.” The State Department is concerned
that, without the reservation, military medical personnel might defer to their own personal interpretaMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
754
tion of medical ethics as justification for refusing
to perform their medical duties according to established national norms. The State Department is also
concerned that definition of the term “medical ethics” might be determined by some currently undetermined international standards that would be
open to political manipulation. 64,65 The State
Department’s concerns are probably unnecessary.
True violations of medical ethics that have occurred
in wartime are not normally of a subtle, political
nature, but rather are obvious violations of basic
humanitarian principles. Additionally, medical personnel have always been guided by medical ethical principles, which, even if not codified, have
nonetheless been clear enough to lead to appropriate behavior. And finally, the Geneva Conventions
by themselves contain the basic ethical principles
needed to guide the activity of medical personnel
on the battlefield. Fortunately, the reservation confines itself to areas of concern where medical personnel would not normally invoke the principles
of medical ethics; therefore, the reservation should
have no adverse effect on how medical personnel
perform their humanitarian duties.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF MEDICAL PERSONNEL
The previous sections have defined the participants
(medical personnel and the wounded and sick), discussed their protections, and delineated the general
guidelines for rendering medical care. This section will
pursue more specifically the responsibilities of medical personnel who are providing care in combat theaters and occupied territories.
In Combat Theaters
The most difficult place to render medical care
would have to be in a combat theater. In a combat
situation, long periods of quiet (and boredom) are
broken by shorter periods of intense and overwhelming activity. Under these stressful conditions,
medical personnel must locate and care for not only
their own wounded and sick, but also the wounded
and sick of the enemy. And, despite the stress, the
medical care rendered must be efficient, effective,
and ethical.
Locating and Collecting the Wounded and Sick
Belligerents have a general obligation to search
for and collect the wounded, sick, and dead. The absence of this obligation during the Battle of Solferino
in 1859 was one of the major motivations for Henry
Dunant to write his book prompting the development
of the Geneva Conventions. However, it was not
until Geneva 1906 that an obligation to search for
the wounded was imposed. Geneva 1929 made the
obligation applicable only after a battle. Now the
requirement is to search “at all times.” The search
should take place not only after a battle, but during
the battle as well. Military conditions will determine
when it is practical to do so. 24,25,27,32,33 Searching for
the wounded and sick will protect them against
robbery and ill-treatment and ensure that they are
cared for in an expedient manner. First aid must be
rendered to the enemy wounded and sick just as it
would be to one’s own troops. Hence, medical personnel are likely to be among the first on the scene
in fulfilling this obligation. Searching for the dead
will prevent the bodies from being robbed and ensure a timely and dignified burial or cremation.
Prior to burial or cremation, medical personnel
must perform a medical examination on the body
for the purpose of confirming death and establishing identity. 24–27
Medical personnel may be called upon to enter a
besieged area in order to deliver medical supplies or
render medical care to their own nationals or enemy
nationals. Evacuated wounded and sick may be allowed to pass through enemy lines and return to
their own side, or they may be made prisoners of war.
Their status, and the status of medical personnel entering the besieged area, would be decided by local
arrangement between opposing commanders. 24,25,27
Caring for the Wounded and Sick
The primary duty owed to the wounded and sick
was stated in Geneva 1864 as simply that they shall
be “taken care of.”11 In 1906 the idea of “respect”
was added. 42 Finally, in 1929 the primary duty was
expanded to include “protection” and “humane
treatment” of the wounded and sick. 47 These four
principles, that the wounded and sick must be respected, protected, cared for, and treated humanely,
are at the heart of the Geneva Conventions and are
repeated throughout the four conventions and the
two protocols. In the context of the Geneva Conventions, the word “respect” means to spare and
not to attack, whereas “protect” means to come to
someone’s defense and to lend help and support. 44
Thus, it is not enough merely to assume a passive
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
755
attitude to the injured enemy soldier who is no longer
fighting; it is mandatory to come to his rescue and
to give him aid and care as required by his condition.
How should that care be rendered? It should be
according to the dictates of medical ethics, and in
this the conventions offer some specific guidelines.
The most important guideline is that the medical
care must be given without any adverse distinction.
This principle of nondiscrimination follows both
from medical ethics and is one of the fundamental
rules of the Red Cross. 66 In all earlier versions of
the Geneva Conventions, the only adverse distinction specifically mentioned was that based on nationality. 11,42,47 However, World War II showed that
this by itself was inadequate. Therefore, Geneva
1949 widened the list of adverse distinctions that
are forbidden to include those based on sex, race,
nationality, religion, and political opinions. 24,25 Protocol I adds color, language, social origin, wealth,
and status by birth to that list. The list is not meant
to be all inclusive, for the catch-all phrase “any other
similar criteria” is also mentioned. 32 Any distinction that is made between patients must be based
on the requirements of the patients. Thus, in addition to distinctions based on differences in the medical conditions of patients, distinctions can be made
to take into account differences in physical attributes or customs. For example, women should
receive special consideration, and it would not be a
breach of rules to give extra blankets to someone
who is normally accustomed to a tropical climate
or special food to someone accustomed to a different diet. Any distinction should have a rational and
humanitarian basis and be determined by what will
hasten the recovery of the patient.
Another guideline offered by the conventions is
that only “urgent medical reasons” can be used to
justify the priority of treatment provided to the
wounded and sick. 24,25 However, nowhere does it
specify what those “urgent medical reasons” are.
In mass-casualty situations when medical resources
are constrained, current doctrine dictates that a
wounded individual with a life-threatening injury
should be treated before someone with a more minor injury, and it might be necessary to allow an
individual to die who is so seriously injured that
his chance of survival is small even with massive
intervention. Other methods of triage have been
used at other times and in other situations. No
single method is dictated by the conventions or the
protocols. Once again, the dictates of medical ethics must determine the criteria used.
Protocol I stipulates that any medical procedure
performed (or omission of a procedure) must meet
two criteria in order to be justified: (1) it must be
indicated by the state of health of the patient, and
(2) it must meet “generally accepted medical standards.”32 The first criterion by itself is not enough.
Based on this criterion alone the Nazis were able to
justify the killing of the mentally incompetent and
chronically ill. However, this type of activity would
be precluded by the need to also meet medical standards that are generally accepted by the international community. Unfortunately, there is nothing
specific to which one can refer when trying to determine what international standards are in effect.
The World Medical Association documents referred
to earlier are a guide. Certainly one undeniable international standard must be that for any procedure
to be indicated, it must be for the benefit of the patient, to either improve his health or reduce his suffering. However, there are international standards
that cannot be universally applied. For instance,
certain levels of medical training and certain medical techniques or procedures may be considered the
international norm, yet very poor countries may be
unable to meet those standards. In acknowledgment
of this problem, the protocol allows a nation to treat
the enemy wounded and sick the same as it would
treat its own nationals who are in no way deprived
of their liberty (hence, standards that apply only to
prisoners would be unacceptable). But, there can
be no doubt that if national standards are used, they
cannot fall below certain minimum standards in
order to be in compliance with Geneva 1949 and
the 1977 Protocols. 45,46
Establishing and Maintaining Medical Records
The keeping of medical records, in general, is not
required by the conventions, except in the case of
donations of blood and skin. However, Protocol I
does recommend that, in the case of prisoners of
war or other detainees, medical personnel should
keep records and that these records should be available for inspection. 32 The purpose of maintaining
the medical records is two-fold. The primary purpose as envisioned by the protocol is to prevent
abuses and to detect breaches of the conventions.
Obviously this is not a foolproof method for preventing abuses, especially abuses involving omissions that endanger someone’s health. Yet it is a
useful tool, because the records can be inspected
without warning by the ICRC or other authorized
entity. The secondary, yet much more useful, reason for maintaining medical records is to enhance
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
756
the provision of medical care. The exact format and
content of the records is not specified, although, as
a practical matter, they should be clear and sufficient to accomplish the latter goal.
The ICRC has established a Central Tracing
Agency for the purpose of reestablishing contact
between victims of war and their families. This
agency gathers and transmits information about
prisoners of war and those who are wounded, sick,
or dead, searches for missing persons, delivers messages between families and victims of war, and organizes reunions and repatriations. Information
about victims of war reaches the Central Tracing
Agency via national Information Bureaus, which
every belligerent must set up at the beginning of
hostilities and during occupations. 26,27 Medical personnel are responsible for recording and forwarding information to their national Information Bureau, which can help in identifying the enemy sick,
wounded, or dead who may fall into their hands.
The required information includes name, country,
serial number, date of birth, and any information
concerning the individual’s illness, wounds, or
cause of death. In the event of death, it is also required to send to the national Information Bureau
any personal documents, money, or articles of intrinsic or sentimental value that the individual possessed. 24,25 In the case of wounded or sick prisoners
of war or civilian internees, regular updates regarding the state of health of the individuals concerned
are required. 26,27
The Extreme Situation: Leaving the Wounded and
Sick Behind
Under certain circumstances it may be necessary
to abandon some of one’s own wounded and sick
to the enemy. This would be an unusual event, because the wounded and sick almost always are moved
with the unit holding them. When the event does
occur, it is most likely to arise in a situation where
the enemy is advancing rapidly and a medical unit
has insufficient time and transportation assets to
move everything and everybody quickly. Whatever
the cause of abandonment, the Conventions require
that sufficient medical personnel and material be
left behind to assist in their care. However, this obligation is not an absolute one, for it is mandatory
only “as far as military considerations permit.”24
Leaving medical personnel behind with the
wounded and sick constitutes a more difficult decision than leaving behind medical supplies. At one
extreme, it is clear that a medical unit commander
should leave medical personnel behind with the
abandoned wounded and sick in his unit if he is
ordered to do so by a higher headquarters. At the
other extreme, it is clear that he should not leave
medical personnel behind if he is certain that the
enemy will kill them, abuse them, or otherwise prevent them from fulfilling their medical mission.
However, there are many circumstances where the
answers are not so clear. For instance, what should
a commander do when he is concerned that leaving medical personnel behind will leave his unit
short of help to tend for future casualties? The commentator on the 1929 Geneva Conventions had this
to say:
This obligation, natural and necessary as it is, may
be a heavy charge if, for example, a retreating belligerent is compelled to abandon several groups of
wounded in turn, leaving medical personnel and
equipment with them each time. He runs the risk
in such a case of having no medical personnel or
equipment left for those of his troops who are the
last to fall. That cannot be helped. It is his duty to
provide for present needs without keeping back the
means of relieving future casualties. If as a result
he has no more medical personnel or equipment
for subsequent casualties, he will have to do all he
can to ensure that they receive relief, even appealing, in such a case to the charity of the inhabitants,
as he is entitled to do under Article 5. 67
And yet, circumstances may exist that cause a commander to take a different course. Any decision
about abandoning wounded and sick must be
firmly founded on ethical principles. Pictet sets the
guideline for making this decision when he states,
If this provision cannot, therefore, be considered
imperative, it represents nonetheless a clear moral
obligation which the responsible authority cannot
evade except in cases of urgent necessity….[This
provision] is a recommendation, but an urgent and
forcible one. 44
Regardless of the decision on leaving medical
personnel behind, if wounded and sick must be
abandoned, they should be left with sufficient food
and medical supplies to ensure their ongoing care,
they should be clearly marked as protected persons,
and, if possible, the enemy should be notified of
their location. Any medical personnel left behind
must not use their arms against the enemy occupying their location, unless forced to do so in self-defense or defense of the patients, and they must try
by means of discussion and persuasion to do all they
can for their patients. Additionally, they must not
hesitate to care for any newly arrived casualties.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
757
Finally, medical personnel may never refuse to care
for wounded and sick that may have been abandoned by the enemy on the pretext that they were
abandoned without medical personnel or supplies.
In Occupied Territories
Occupying forces have certain obligations in occupied territories that may involve medical personnel.
These include ensuring that the civilian population
has adequate food and medical supplies, cooperating with local and national authorities in maintaining hospitals and medical services, and ensuring
public health and hygiene. 27 Following a military
engagement there is frequently a breakdown in
public services and infrastructure. Especially when
large refugee populations are involved, the lack of
basic essentials may lead to widespread disease and
epidemics. It is incumbent upon the invading force
to be proactive in this regard. Yet it is not solely
their responsibility. The local healthcare community
has a role to play, as well. Ideally, the community
will be able to provide its own services, in which
case the only obligation of the occupying force
would be to prevent any hindering of that effort. If
this is not the case, support may be required. This
may involve providing advice to local authorities,
public education, immunization programs, medical supplies, medical support to epidemic areas, and
new hospital construction. To ensure effectiveness
and a degree of harmony with the local population,
due regard must be paid to the habits and customs
of the civilian community.
Under certain circumstances it may be necessary
to requisition civilian hospitals in order to care for
military wounded and sick. This has always been
allowed, although the Geneva Conventions provide
certain safeguards against abuses. In order to legally
requisition a hospital, it must be used only for the
care of the military wounded and sick, there must
be an urgent need, and suitable arrangements must
be made to ensure that the persons already hospitalized there will receive adequate care and that the
needs of the civilian population will be met. Furthermore, the requisition can only be temporary; the
hospital must be returned when the emergency has
been resolved. It follows that an occupying force
may not requisition a hospital if it is capable of caring for its own wounded and sick, nor may it, under any circumstances, use a requisitioned hospital
for any purpose other than the provision of medical care. Medical supplies in a civilian hospital may
also be requisitioned separate from the hospital.
Again, there must be an urgent need, the hospital
patients and civilian population must not be left
wanting, and the supplies must be replaced as soon
as possible. 27
Refraining From Prohibited Acts
Certain medical procedures are specifically prohibited by the conventions. Geneva 1949 mentions
torture and biological experiments. 24–27 Protocol I
adds physical mutilations and removal of tissue or
organs for transplantation. 32 These acts, along with
murder and willfully causing great suffering or serious injury, are considered “grave breaches” when
they are committed against the wounded and sick
or other protected persons. By international humanitarian law the State must immediately put a
stop to any violations of this type and punish the
violators. The violators include not only those who
actively commit the crimes, but also those who order
the commission of the crimes by their subordinates
or who know that a subordinate is committing or
about to commit crimes without taking every measure possible to prevent them. The State must bring
violators before its own courts, regardless of their
nationality, or it may turn them over to another State
that wishes to prosecute them. 68
Torture
Torture in wartime is usually used to extract information from the enemy. However, it may also be
used to merely punish an individual physically or
damage him psychologically. Torture may include
acts of abuse ranging from cruel and degrading
treatment to physical assaults leading to death.
Physician participation in torture has occurred
throughout history. The most recent, glaring examples were revealed in the war crimes trials following World War II. Unfortunately, torture and
physician participation in it have frequently been
given legal respectability by governments that
lacked moral integrity. A physician may participate
in torture by administering a drug to an individual
to facilitate interrogation, or by evaluating whether
a prisoner is physically capable of undergoing torture for purposes of interrogation. A physician may
participate in torture by wrongly applying psychiatric diagnosis and treatment to fulfill a political
goal. A physician may even participate in torture
by using his medical skills to devise new methods
of torture, even though he is not directly involved
in administering that torture. Whether or not physician participation in capital punishment represents participation in torture is still an open debate.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
758
Although the law may allow it, many national and
international medical groups consider such an act
unethical. 69
Experimentation
The prohibition against medical, biological, or
other scientific experiments arose out of the experience of World War II. In peacetime, scientific experiments involving human subjects are necessary
for the progress of medicine, provided that the necessary precautions are taken to assure safety and
complete consent. In wartime it is impossible to be
certain of complete consent, given freely, of any
person protected by the Geneva Conventions. The
mere fact that the individual is under the control of
his enemy makes that consent very suspect. Therefore, experiments involving enemy prisoners of war,
enemy wounded and sick, and enemy civilians are
prohibited. However, this prohibition does not preclude medical personnel from using new methods
of treatment that are justified on medical grounds
and used solely with the intention of improving the
patient’s health. For instance, one might justify giving a new medication that is not yet in general use
in the hope that it will benefit a patient who would
otherwise die without it. Where this kind of treatment finally crosses the line and becomes a “medical experiment” is determined by medical ethics.
Mutilation
Physical mutilations are prohibited and would
never seem to be allowed under any circumstances.
However, the term might also encompass procedures such as amputations, which, under certain
circumstances, are absolutely essential. Therefore,
a logical interpretation would be that if the procedure is medically indicated and within generally
accepted medical standards it is not a “physical
mutilation” and, therefore, not forbidden.
Transplantation
The transplantation of tissue or organs is a relatively modern development. It has become commonplace in peacetime, but in wartime the procedure is
prohibited when it involves enemy nationals, because the removal of tissue or organs from the donor cannot be justified based on the state of health
of the donor. In wartime, the benefit to be gained
by the recipient is not outweighed by the potential
for abuse of the donor. As with medical experiments, individuals in captivity or otherwise under
the control of their enemy are assumed to be unable to freely consent to transplantations. Presumably transplantation of organs from cadavers would
also be prohibited because of the potential for abuse
of the donor while alive (eg, hastening death to free
up the organs more quickly), and also because of
the requirement to ensure that those who have died
in captivity are honorably buried. 26,27 If, in fact, an
enemy soldier is in need of a transplant, possible
solutions might be to find a donor among one’s own
nationals, or to send the individual, perhaps accompanied by a matching donor of his own nationality,
back to his own country for the transplant. It should
be noted that this rule does not disallow the removal
of diseased organs for therapeutic reasons. Nor does
it disallow autologous transplants, such as the removal of bone marrow from an individual with the
intention of reimplanting it back into the same individual as part of a therapeutic procedure.
Protocol I does allow two exceptions to the prohibition against transplantations. One is blood for
transfusion and the other is skin for grafting. These
are extremely logical and useful exceptions to the
transplantation rules. The donation of these tissues
can be lifesaving, and the potential for abuse is not
as great as with the donation of other tissues and
organs. However, strict rules are mandated in order to prevent abuses. First, the donations must be
absolutely voluntary; coercion (threats, punishments,
etc.) and even inducements (promises, rewards, etc.)
are explicitly prohibited. Second, the donations must
be for therapeutic purposes only; removal of blood
or skin for experimental purposes, for instance,
would be prohibited. Third, the donations must be
made under conditions consistent with generally
accepted medical standards and in such a way that
no harm comes to the donor or recipient; examples
of generally accepted medical standards for blood
transfusions would be the performance of certain
tests on blood before it is transfused, and restrictions on the amount of blood that can be taken from
an individual. And finally, records must be kept of
every donation of blood or skin; the purpose of this
compulsory record keeping is as an additional guarantee against abuses. 32
Surgery Without Consent
A well-recognized medical ethical standard, reiterated in Protocol I, is that a patient has the right
to refuse any surgical procedure, even if it absolutely necessary for his survival and in every other
way medically justifiable. 32 This requirement must
be tempered with a certain amount of logic. ObviMlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
759
ously, a surgeon should not feel bound by a refusal
expressed by a child or by someone whose judgment has been impaired by his injury or illness. A
gray area may be encountered when someone refuses a procedure but then falls into a coma, or when
someone claims to speak for someone else in refusing a procedure. Delicate problems of medical ethics may arise for which there are no clear answers. If
a surgeon decides that he is not ethically bound by
a refusal and proceeds with an operation, he should
be absolutely certain that the operation is medically
justified and within generally accepted medical
standards. In the event of any refusal, medical personnel should endeavor to obtain a written statement to that effect that is signed or acknowledged
by the patient. This may not always be possible
during the chaos created by war, and a written refusal is not mandated. Yet it would seem advisable
to at least document the refusal or the ignoring of a
refusal in the patient’s medical record when time
allows it, if for no other reason than to prevent any
claim at a later date of a breach of the conventions.
REFERENCES
1.
Pictet J. International humanitarian law: Definition. In: International Dimensions of Humanitarian Law. Geneva:
Henry Dunant Institute; 1988.
2.
Friedman L, ed. The Law of War: A Documentary History. Vol 2. New York: Random House; 1972.
3.
Sun Tzu. The Art of War. London: Oxford University Press; 1963.
4.
Deuteronomy 20:10–20.
5.
Bordwell P. The Law of War Between Belligerents: A History and Commentary. Chicago: Callaghan & Co; 1908.
6.
Keen MH. The Laws of War in the Late Middle Ages. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul; 1965.
7.
Grotius H. De jure belli ac pacis. In: Scott JB, ed. The Classics of International Law. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1925.
8.
Butler G, MacCoby S. The Development of International Law. London: Longmans Green & Co; 1928.
9.
Dunant H. A Memory of Solferino. Geneva: International Committee of the Red Cross; 1986.
10.
Resolutions of the Geneva International Conference, 26–29 October 1863. In: Schindler D, Toman J, eds. The
Laws of Armed Conflicts: A Collection of Conventions, Resolutions and Other Documents. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers; 1988.
11.
1864 Red Cross Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded in Armies in the Field. In:
Friedman L, ed. The Law of War: A Documentary History. Vol 2. New York: Random House; 1972.
CONCLUSION
The four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
two 1977 Protocols form as complete a system of
protections for the victims of war as one can expect,
short of the banning of all forms of warfare. The details and specific provisions within them are changing over time, primarily in response to changes in
technologies, customs, and methods of warfare, but
the basic underlying humanitarian principles have
remained unchanged. Concerning the provision of
medical care, the focus is on the wounded and sick,
reducing their suffering and speeding their recovery. All of the protections granted military medical
personnel and medical equipment are granted solely
with this intent in mind.
How medical personnel should behave so as not
to jeopardize their protection is summarized best
by the protocols wherein medical ethics are declared
the guide. Many military medical personnel are not
well schooled in the military arts and, therefore,
have only a partial understanding of the multidimensional problems that can be encountered on the
battlefield. But nearly all are well schooled in medical ethics. If they keep medical ethical principles in
mind when treating their patients and are familiar
with their rights and duties as put forth by the law
of Geneva, they will be more able to cope with the
battlefield situation in an appropriate, humanitarian fashion.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
760
12.
Gagnebin B, Gazay M. Encounter With Henry Dunant. Geneva: Librairie de l’Université Georg et Cie; 1963.
13.
Boissier P. History of the International Committee of the Red Cross From Solferino to Tsushima. Geneva: Henry Dunant
Institute; 1985.
14.
Pictet J. Development and Principles of International Humanitarian Law. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Martinus
Nijhoff Publishers; 1985.
15.
Vollmar LC. Development of the laws of war as they pertain to medical units and their personnel. Mil Med.
1992;157:231–236.
16.
Durand A. History of the International Committee of the Red Cross from Sarajevo to Hiroshima. Geneva: Henry Dunant
Institute; 1984.
17.
Draper GIAD. The development of international humanitarian law. In: International Dimensions of Humanitarian
Law. Geneva: Henry Dunant Institute; 1988.
18.
Green LC. Essays on the Modern Law of War. Dobbs Ferry, New York: Transnational Publishers; 1985.
19.
US v Greifelt. In: Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control Council Law. Vol 4–
5. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1950.
20.
US v Brandt. In: Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control Council Law. Vol 1–
2. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1949.
21.
US Department of the Army. International Law. Vol 2. Washington, DC: Department of the Army; 1962. Pamphlet 27-161-2.
22.
Garner JW. International Law and the World War. Vol 1. London: Longmans Green & Co; 1920.
23.
Oppenheim L. International Law: A Treatise. 7th ed. Vol 2. London: Longmans Green & Co; 1952.
24.
1949 Geneva Convention I for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in
the Field. In: Roberts A, Guelff R, eds. Documents on the Laws of War. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1989.
25.
1949 Geneva Convention II for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded, Sick, and Shipwrecked
Members of Armed Forces at Sea. In: Roberts A, Guelff R, eds. Documents on the Laws of War. 2nd ed. Oxford:
Clarendon Press; 1989.
26.
1949 Geneva Convention III Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War. In: Roberts A, Guelff R, eds. Documents on the Laws of War. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1989.
27.
1949 Geneva Convention IV Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. In: Roberts A, Guelff
R, eds. Documents on the Laws of War. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1989.
28.
US Department of the Army. The Law of Land Warfare. Washington, DC: Department of the Army; 1956. Field
Manual 27-10.
29.
US Department of the Air Force. International Law—The Conduct of Armed Conflict and Air Operations. Washington, DC: Department of the Air Force; 1976. AF Pamphlet 110-31.
30.
US Department of the Navy. Annotated Supplement to the Commander’s Handbook on the Law of Naval Operations.
Washington, DC: US Department of the Navy; 1989. NWP (REV A) FM 1-10.
31.
International Committee of the Red Cross. 1993 Annual Report. Geneva: ICRC; 1993.
32.
1977 Geneva Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts. In: Roberts A, Guelff R, eds. Documents on the Laws of War. 2nd
ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1989.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
761
33.
1977 Geneva Protocol II Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts. In: Roberts A, Guelff R, eds. Documents on the Laws of
War. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1989.
34.
Dinstein Y. Commentator. Am Univ Law Rev. 1982;31:849–853.
35.
Aldrich GH. Guerrilla combatants and prisoner of war status. Am Univ Law Rev. 1982;31:871–882.
36.
Aldrich GH. Why the United States of America should ratify Additional Protocol I. In: Delissen AJM, Tanja G,
eds. Humanitarian Law of Armed Conflict Challenges Ahead. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers; 1991.
37.
Feith DJ. Protocol I: Moving humanitarian law backwards. Akron Law Rev. 1986;19(4):531–535.
38.
Levie HS. Pros and cons of the 1977 Protocol I. Akron Law Rev. 1986;19(4):537–542.
39.
Carnahan BM. Additional Protocol I: A military view. Akron Law Rev. 1986;19(4):543–549.
40.
McMahon TE. A good treaty. Akron Law Rev. 1986;19(4):551–556.
41.
Parks WH. Personal Communication, 1994.
42.
1906 Red Cross Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armies in the
Field. In: Friedman L, ed. The Law of War: A Documentary History. Vol 2. New York: Random House; 1972.
43.
1907 Hague Convention X for the Adaptation to Maritime Warfare of the Principles of the Geneva Convention.
In: Friedman L, ed. The Law of War: A Documentary History. Vol 2. New York: Random House; 1972.
44.
Pictet JS. Commentary: Geneva Convention I for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed
Forces in the Field. Geneva: International Committee of the Red Cross; 1952.
45.
Bothe M, Partsch KJ, Solf WA. New Rules for Victims of Armed Conflicts: Commentary on the Two 1977 Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers; 1982.
46.
Sandoz Y, Swinarski C, Zimmermann B. Commentary on the Additional Protocols of 8 June 1977 to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949. Geneva: International Committee of the Red Cross; 1987.
47.
1929 Red Cross Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick of Armies in the
Field. In: Friedman L, ed. The Law of War: A Documentary History. Vol 2. New York: Random House; 1972.
48.
Pictet JS. Commentary: Geneva Convention II for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea. Geneva: International Committee of the Red Cross; 1960.
49.
Levie HS. The Code of International Armed Conflict. Vol 2. New York: Oceana Publications; 1986.
50.
The World Medical Association. Declaration of Geneva. Adopted by the 2nd General Assembly of the World
Medical Association, Geneva, Switzerland, September 1948, amended by the 22nd World Medical Assembly,
Sydney, Australia, August 1968, and the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The
World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association;
1993: Section 17.A.
51.
The World Medical Association. International Code of Medical Ethics. Adopted by the 3rd General Assembly of
the World Medical Association, London, England, October 1949, amended by the 22nd World Medical Assembly, Sydney Australia, August 1968, and the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The
World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association;
1993: Section 17.A.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
762
52.
The World Medical Association. Regulations in Time of Armed Conflict. Adopted by the 10th World Medical
Assembly, Havana, Cuba, October 1956, edited by the 11th World Medical Assembly, Istanbul, Turkey, October
1957, and amended by the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The World Medical
Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17. 50.
53.
The World Medical Association. Rules Governing the Care of Sick and Wounded, Particularly in Time of Conflict.
Adopted by the 10th World Medical Assembly, Havana, Cuba, October 1956, edited by the 11th World Medical
Assembly, Istanbul, Turkey, October 1957, and amended by the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy,
October 1983. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World
Medical Association; 1993: Section 17. 50.
54.
The World Medical Association. Declaration of Helsinki: Recommendations Guiding Physicians in Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects. Adopted by the 18th World Medical Assembly, Helsinki, Finland, June 1964,
and amended by the 29th World Medical Assembly, Tokyo, Japan, October 1975, the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983, and the 41st World Medical Assembly, Hong Kong, September 1989. In: The
World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association;
1993: Section 17.C.
55.
The World Medical Association. Declaration of Tokyo: Guidelines for Medical Doctors Concerning Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in Relation to Detention and Imprisonment. Adopted by the
29th World Medical Assembly, Tokyo, Japan, October 1975. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17.F.
56.
The World Medical Association. Statement on Physician-Assisted Suicide. Adopted by the 44th World Medical
Assembly, Marbella, Spain, September 1992. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. FerneyVoltaire, France: The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17.PP.
57.
Baccino-Astrada A. Manual on the Rights and Duties of Medical Personnel in Armed Conflicts. Geneva: International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies; 1982.
58.
Levie HS. The Code of International Armed Conflict. Vol 1. New York: Oceana Publications; 1986.
59.
Levie HS. Protection of War Victims: Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Vol 1. Dobbs Ferry, New York:
Oceana Publications; 1979.
60.
International Committee of the Red Cross. Report on the Work of the Conference of Government Experts on the
Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts. Geneva: ICRC;
1971.
61.
Swiss Federal Council. Official Records of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, Geneva (1974–1977). Vol 1. Bern: Federal Political Department: 1978.
62.
US v Levy. CMR. 1968;39:672–682.
63.
Levy v Parker. Mil Law Rep. 1973;1:2130–2151.
64.
Message from the President of the United States Transmitting the Protocol II Additional to the Geneva Conventions of August 12, 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts, Concluded at Geneva on June 10, 1977. Senate Treaty Document 100-2, US Senate, 100th Congress, 1st Session.
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1987.
65.
Smith D. New protections for victims of international armed conflicts: the proposed ratification of Protocol II
by the United States. Mil Law Rev. 1988;120(Spring):59–82.
66.
1978 Red Cross Fundamental Rules of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts. In:
Roberts A, Guelff R, eds. Documents on the Laws of War. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1989.
67.
Des Gouttes P. As quoted by Pictet JS. Commentary: Geneva Convention I for the Amelioration of the Condition of the
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field. Geneva: International Committee of the Red Cross; 1952: 141.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
763
Chapter 23: ATTACHMENTS
INTERNATIONAL GUIDANCE ON HUMANITARIAN CARE
Resolutions of the Geneva International Conference Geneva, 26–29 October 1863
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded in Armies in the Field, Geneva, 22 August 1864
World Medical Association (WMA) Documents:
WMA Declaration of Geneva
WMA International Code of Medical Ethics
WMA Regulations in Time of Armed Conflict
WMA Rules Governing the Care of Sick and Wounded, Particularly in Time of Conflict
WMA Declaration of Helsinki
WMA Declaration of Tokyo
WMA Statement on Physician-Assisted Suicide
1978 Red Cross Fundamental Rules of International Humanitarian Law Applicable In Armed Conflicts
RESOLUTIONS OF THE GENEVA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
GENEVA, 26–29 OCTOBER 1863
The International Conference, desirous of coming to the aid of the wounded should the Military Medical Services
prove inadequate, adopts the following Resolutions:
Article 1
Each country shall have a Committee whose duty it shall be, in time of war and if the need arises, to assist the
Army Medical Services by every means in its power.
The Committee shall organize itself in the manner which seems to it most useful and appropriate.
Article 2
An unlimited number of Sections may be formed to assist the Committee, which shall be the central directing body.
Article 3
Each Committee shall get in touch with the Government of its country, so that its services may be accepted should
the occasion arise.
Article 4
In peacetime, the Committees and Sections shall take steps to ensure their real usefulness in time of war, especially by preparing material relief of all sorts and by seeking to train and instruct voluntary medical personnel.
Article 5
In time of war, the Committees of belligerent nations shall supply relief to their respective armies as far as their
means permit; in particular, they shall organize voluntary personnel and place them on an active footing and, in
agreement with the military authorities, shall have premises made available for the care of the wounded.
They may call for assistance upon the Committees of neutral countries.
Article 6
On the request or with the consent of the military authorities, Committees may send voluntary medical personnel
to the battlefield where they shall be placed under military command.
Article 7
Voluntary medical personnel attached to armies shall be supplied by the respective Committees with everything
necessary for their upkeep.
Article 8
They shall wear in all countries, as a uniform distinctive sign, a white armlet with a red cross.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
764
Article 9
The Committees and Sections of different countries may meet in international assemblies to communicate the
results of their experience and to agree on measures to be taken in the interests of the work.
Article 10
The exchange of communications between the Committees of the various countries shall be made for the time
being through the intermediary of the Geneva Committee.
Independently of the above Resolutions, the Conference makes the following Recommendations:
(a)
that Governments should extend their patronage to Relief Committees which may be formed, and facilitate
as far as possible the accomplishment of their task;
(b)
that in time of war the belligerent nations should proclaim the neutrality of ambulances and military hospitals, and that neutrality should likewise be recognized, fully and absolutely, in respect of official medical
personnel, voluntary medical personnel, inhabitants of the country who go to the relief of the wounded,
and the wounded themselves;
(c)
that a uniform distinctive sign be recognized for the Medical Corps of all armies, or at least for all persons
of the same army belonging to this Service; and, that a uniform flag also be adopted in all countries for
ambulances and hospitals.
Source: Resolutions of the Geneva International Conference, 26–29 October 1863. In: Schindler D, Toman J, eds. The Laws of Armed
Conflicts: A Collection of Conventions, Resolutions and Other Documents. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers;
1988: 209–211.
CONVENTION FOR THE AMELIORATION OF THE
CONDITION OF THE WOUNDED IN ARMIES IN THE FIELD
GENEVA, 22 AUGUST 1864
Article 1
Ambulances and military hospitals shall be acknowledged to be neuter [sic], and, as such, shall be protected and
respected by belligerents so long as any sick or wounded may be therein.
Such neutrality shall cease if the ambulances or hospitals should be held by a military force.
Article 2
Persons employed in hospitals and ambulances, comprising the staff for superintendence, medical service, administration, transport of wounded, as well as chaplains, shall participate in the benefit of neutrality, whilst so employed, and so long as there remain any wounded to bring in or to succor.
Article 3
The persons designated in the preceding article may, even after occupation by the enemy, continue to fulfill their
duties in the hospital or ambulance which they serve, or may withdraw in order to rejoin the corps to which they
belong.
Under such circumstances, when these persons shall cease from their functions, they shall be delivered by the
occupying army to the outposts of the enemy.
Article 4
As the equipment of military hospitals remain subject to the laws of war, persons attached to such hospitals cannot, in withdrawing, carry away any articles but such as are their private property.
Under the same circumstances an ambulance shall, on the contrary, retain its equipment.
Article 5
Inhabitants of the country who may bring help to the wounded shall be respected, and shall remain free. The
generals of the belligerent Powers shall make it their care to inform the inhabitants of the appeal addressed to their
humanity, and of the neutrality which will be the consequence of it.
Any wounded man entertained and taken care of in a house shall be considered as a protection thereto. Any
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
765
inhabitant who shall have entertained wounded men in their house shall be exempted from the quartering of troops,
as well as from a part of the contributions of war which may be imposed.
Article 6
Wounded or sick soldiers shall be entertained and taken care of, to whatever nation they may belong.
Commanders-in-chief shall have the power to deliver immediately to the outposts of the enemy soldiers who have
been wounded in an engagement, when circumstances permit this to be done, and with the consent of both parties.
Those who are recognized, after their wounds are healed, as incapable of serving, shall be sent back to their country.
The others may also be sent back, on condition of not again bearing arms during the continuance of the war.
Evacuations, together with the persons under whose directions they take place, shall be protected by an absolute
neutrality.
Article 7
A distinctive and uniform flag shall be adopted for hospitals, ambulances and evacuations. It must, on every
occasion, be accompanied by the national flag. An arm-badge (brassard) shall be allowed for individuals neutralized,
but the delivery thereof shall be left to military authority.
The flag and the arm-badge shall bear a red cross on a white ground.
Article 8
The details of execution of the present convention shall be regulated by the commanders-in-chief of belligerent
armies, according to the instructions of their respective governments, and in conformity with the general principles
laid down in this convention.
Article 9
The high contracting Powers have agreed to communicate the present convention to those Governments which
have not found it convenient to send plenipotentiaries to the International Conference at Geneva, with an invitation
to accede thereto; the protocol is for that purpose left open.
Article 10
The present convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Berne, in four months, or
sooner, if possible.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed it and have affixed their seals thereto.
Done at Geneva, the twenty-second day of the month of August of the year one thousand eight hundred and sixty-four.
Source: 1864 Red Cross Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded in Armies in the Field. In: Friedman L,
ed. The Law of War: A Documentary History. Vol 1. New York: Random House; 1972: 189–191.
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
DECLARATION OF GENEVA
AT THE TIME OF BEING ADMITTED AS A MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION:
I SOLEMNLY PLEDGE myself to consecrate my life to the service of humanity;
I WILL GIVE to my teachers the respect and gratitude which is their due;
I WILL PRACTICE my profession with conscience and dignity;
THE HEALTH OF MY PATIENT will be my first consideration;
I WILL RESPECT the secrets which are confided in me, even after the patient has died;
I WILL MAINTAIN by all means in my power, the honor and the noble traditions of the medical profession;
MY COLLEAGUES will be my brothers;
I WILL NOT PERMIT considerations of religion, nationality, race, party politics or social standing to intervene
between my duty and my patient;
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
766
I WILL MAINTAIN the utmost respect for human life from its beginning even under threat and I will not use my
medical knowledge contrary to the laws of humanity;
I MAKE THESE PROMISES solemnly, freely and upon my honor.
Source: The World Medical Association. Declaration of Geneva. Adopted by the 2nd General Assembly of the World Medical Association, Geneva, Switzerland, September 1948, amended by the 22nd World Medical Assembly, Sydney, Australia, August 1968, and
the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. FerneyVoltaire, France: The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17.A.
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL CODE
OF
MEDICAL ETHICS
DUTIES OF PHYSICIANS IN GENERAL
A PHYSICIAN SHALL always maintain the highest standards of professional conduct.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL not permit motives of profit to influence the free and independent exercise of professional judgment
on behalf of patients.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL, in all types of medical practice, be dedicated to providing competent medical service in full technical
and moral independence, with compassion and respect for human dignity.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL deal honestly with patients and colleagues, and strive to expose those physicians deficient in
character or competence, or who engage in fraud or deception.
The following practices are deemed to be unethical conduct:
(a)
Self advertising by physicians, unless permitted by the laws of the country and the Code of Ethics of the
National Medical Association.
(b)
Paying or receiving any fee or any other consideration solely to procure the referral of a patient or for
prescribing or referring a patient to any source.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL respect the rights of patients, of colleagues, and of other health professionals, and shall safeguard
patient confidences.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL act only in the patient’s interest when providing medical care which might have the effect of
weakening the physical and mental condition of the patient.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL use great caution in divulging discoveries or new techniques or treatment through non-professional
channels.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL certify only that which he has personally verified.
DUTIES OF PHYSICIANS TO THE SICK
A PHYSICIAN SHALL always bear in mind the obligation of preserving human life.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL owe his patients complete loyalty and all the resources of his science. Whenever an examination or
treatment is beyond the physician’s capacity he should summon another physician who has the necessary ability.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL preserve absolute confidentiality on all he knows about his patient even after the patient has died.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL give emergency care as a humanitarian duty unless he is assured that others are willing and able to
give such care.
DUTIES OF PHYSICIANS TO EACH OTHER
A PHYSICIAN SHALL behave towards his colleagues as he would have them behave towards him.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL NOT entice patients from his colleagues.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL observe the principles of the “Declaration of Geneva” approved by the World Medical Association.
Source: The World Medical Association. International Code of Medical Ethics. Adopted by the 3rd General Assembly of the World
Medical Association, London, England, October 1949, amended by the 22nd World Medical Assembly, Sydney Australia, August
1968, and the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations.
Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17.A.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
767
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
REGULATIONS IN TIME OF ARMED CONFLICT
1.
Medical Ethics in time of armed conflict is identical to medical ethics in time of peace, as established in the
International Code of Medical Ethics of the World Medical Association. The primary obligation of the physician is his professional duty; in performing his professional duty, the physician’s supreme guide is his
conscience.
2.
The primary task of the medical profession is to preserve health and save life. Hence it is deemed unethical
for physicians to:
(a)
Give advice or perform prophylactic, diagnostic or therapeutic procedures that are not justifiable in
the patient’s interest.
(b)
Weaken the physical or mental strength of a human being without therapeutic justification.
(c)
Employ scientific knowledge to imperil health or destroy life.
3.
Human experimentation in time of armed conflict is governed by the same code as in time of peace; it is
strictly forbidden on all persons deprived of their liberty, especially civilian and military prisoners and the
population of occupied countries.
4.
In emergencies, the physician must always give the required care impartially and without consideration of
sex, race, nationality, religion, political affiliation or any other similar criterion. Such medical assistance
must be continued for as long as necessary and practicable.
5.
Medical confidentially must be preserved by the physician in the practice of his profession.
6.
Privileges and facilities afforded the physician must never be used for other than professional purposes.
Source: The World Medical Association. Regulations in Time of Armed Conflict. Adopted by the 10th World Medical Assembly, Havana, Cuba, October 1956, edited by the 11th World Medical Assembly, Istanbul, Turkey, October 1957, and amended by the 35th
World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire,
France: The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17. 50.
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
 RULES GOVERNING THE CARE OF SICK AND WOUNDED,
PARTICULARLY IN TIME OF CONFLICT
A.
1.
Under all circumstances, every person, military or civilian must receive promptly the care he needs without
consideration of sex, race, nationality, religion, political affiliation or any other similar criterion.
2.
Any procedure detrimental to the health, physical or mental integrity of a human being is forbidden unless
therapeutically justifiable.
B.
1.
In emergencies, physicians and associated medical personnel are required to render immediate service to
the best of their ability. No distinction shall be made between patients except those justified by medical
urgency.
2.
The members of medical and auxiliary professions must be granted the protection needed to carry out their
professional activities freely. The assistance necessary should be given to them in fulfilling their responsibilities. Free passage should be granted whenever their assistance is required. They should be afforded
complete professional independence.
3.
The fulfillment of medical duties and responsibilities shall in no circumstances be considered an offence.
The physician must never be prosecuted for observing professional confidentiality.
4.
In fulfilling their professional duties, the medical and auxiliary professions will be identified by the distinctive emblem of a red serpent and staff on a white field. The use of this emblem is governed by special
regulation.
Source: The World Medical Association. Rules Governing the Care of Sick and Wounded, Particularly in Time of Conflict. Adopted by the
10th World Medical Assembly, Havana, Cuba, October 1956, edited by the 11th World Medical Assembly, Istanbul, Turkey, October
1957, and amended by the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of
Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17. 50.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
768
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
DECLARATION OF HELSINKI
INTRODUCTION
It is the mission of the physician to safeguard the health of the people. His or her knowledge and conscience are
dedicated to the fulfillment of this mission.
The Declaration of Geneva of the World Medical Association binds the physician with the words, “The health of my
patient will be my first consideration,” and the International Code of Medical Ethics declares that, “A physician shall
act only in the patient’s interest when providing medical care which might have the effect of weakening the physical
and mental condition of the patient.”
•
The purpose of biomedical research involving human subjects must be to improve diagnostic, therapeutic
and prophylactic procedures and the understanding of the etiology and pathogenesis of disease.
•
In current medical practice most diagnostic, therapeutic or prophylactic procedures involve hazards. This
applies especially to biomedical research.
•
Medical progress is based on research which ultimately must rest in part on experimentation involving
human subjects.
•
In the field of biomedical research a fundamental distinction must be recognized between medical research
in which the aim is essentially diagnostic or therapeutic for a patient, and medical research, the essential
object of which is purely scientific and without implying direct diagnostic or therapeutic value to the person
subjected to the research.
•
Special caution must be exercised in the conduct of research which may affect the environment, and the
welfare of animals used for research must be respected.
•
Because it is essential that the results of laboratory experiments be applied to human beings to further scientific knowledge and to help suffering humanity, the World Medical Association has prepared the following
recommendations as a guide to every physician in biomedical research involving human subjects. They
should be kept under review in the future. It must be stressed that the standards as drafted are only a guide
to physicians all over the world. Physicians are not relieved from criminal, civil and ethical responsibilities.
I. BASIC PRINCIPLES
1.
Biomedical research involving human subjects must conform to generally accepted scientific principles and
should be based on adequately performed laboratory and animal experimentation and on a thorough knowledge of the scientific literature.
2.
The design and performance of each experimental procedure involving human subjects should be clearly
formulated in an experimental protocol which should be transmitted for consideration, comment and guidance to a specially appointed committee independent of the investigator and the sponsor provided that this
independent committee is in conformity with the laws and regulations of the country in which the research
experiment is performed.
3.
Biomedical research involving human subjects should be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons
and under the supervision of a clinically competent medical person. The responsibility for the human subject must always rest with a medically qualified person and never rest on the subject of the research, even
though the subject has given his or her consent.
4.
Biomedical research involving human subjects cannot legitimately be carried out unless the importance of
the objective is in proportion to the inherent risk to the subject.
5.
Every biomedical research project involving human subjects should be preceded by careful assessment of
predictable risks in comparison with foreseeable benefits to the subject or to others. Concern for the interests of the subject must always prevail over the interests of science and society.
6.
The right of the research subject to safeguard his or her integrity must always be respected. Every precaution should be taken to respect the privacy of the subject and to minimize the impact of the study on the
subject’s physical and mental integrity and on the personality of the subject.
7.
Physicians should abstain from engaging in research projects involving human subjects unless they are
satisfied that the hazards involved are believed to be predictable. Physicians should cease any investigation if the hazards are found to outweigh the potential benefits.
8.
In publication of the results of his or her research, the physician is obliged to preserve the accuracy of the
results. Reports of experimentation not in accordance with the principles laid down in this Declaration
should not be accepted for publication.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
769
9.
In any research on human beings, each potential subject must be adequately informed of the aims, methods, anticipated benefits and potential hazards of the study and the discomfort it may entail. He or she
should be informed that he or she is at liberty to abstain from participation in the study and that he or she
is free to withdraw his or her consent to participation at any time. The physician should then obtain the
subject’s freely-given informed consent, preferably in writing.
10.
When obtaining informed consent for the research project the physician should be particularly cautious if
the subject is in a dependent relationship to him or her or may consent under duress. In that case the informed consent should be obtained by a physician who is not engaged in the investigation and who is
completely independent of this official relationship.
11.
In case of legal incompetence, informed consent should be obtained from the legal guardian in accordance
with national legislation. Where physical or mental incapacity makes it impossible to obtain informed consent, or when the subject is a minor, permission from the responsible relative replaces that of the subject in
accordance with national legislation.
Whenever the minor child is in fact able to give a consent, the minor’s consent must be obtained in addition
to the consent of the minor’s legal guardian.
12.
The research protocol should always contain a statement of the ethical considerations involved and should
indicate that the principles enunciated in the present Declaration are complied with.
II. MEDICAL RESEARCH COMBINED WITH PROFESSIONAL CARE (Clinical research)
1.
In the treatment of the sick person, the physician must be free to use a new diagnostic and therapeutic
measure, if in his or her judgment it offers hope of saving life, reestablishing health or alleviating suffering.
2.
The potential benefits, hazards and discomfort of a new method should be weighed against the advantages
of the best current diagnostic and therapeutic methods.
3.
In any medical study, every patient—including those of a control group, if any—should be assured of the
best proven diagnostic and therapeutic method.
4.
The refusal of the patient to participate in a study must never interfere with the physician-patient relationship.
5.
If the physician considers it essential not to obtain informed consent, the specific reasons for this proposal
should be stated in the experimental protocol for transmission to the independent committee.
6.
The physician can combine medical research with professional care, the objective being the acquisition of
new medical knowledge, only to the extent that medical research is justified by its potential diagnostic or
therapeutic value for the patient.
III.NON-THERAPEUTIC BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS
(Non-clinical biomedical research)
1.
In the purely scientific application of medical research carried out on a human being, it is the duty of the
physician to remain the protector of the life and health of that person on whom biomedical research is being
carried out.
2.
The subjects should be volunteers—either healthy persons or patients for whom the experimental design is
not related to the patient’s illness.
3.
The investigator or the investigating team should discontinue the research if in his/her or their judgment it
may, if continued, be harmful to the individual.
4.
In research on man, the interest of science and society should never take precedence over considerations
related to the well-being of the subject.
Source: The World Medical Association. Declaration of Helsinki: Recommendations Guiding Physicians in Biomedical Research Involving
Human Subjects. Adopted by the 18th World Medical Assembly, Helsinki, Finland, June 1964, and amended by the 29th World
Medical Assembly, Tokyo, Japan, October 1975, the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983, and the 41st World
Medical Assembly, Hong Kong, September 1989. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France:
The World Medical Association; 1993: Section 17.C.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
770
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
DECLARATION OF TOKYO
PREAMBLE
It is the privilege of the medical doctor to practice medicine in the service of humanity, to preserve and restore bodily
and mental health without distinction as to persons, to comfort and to ease the suffering of his or her patients. The
utmost respect for human life is to be maintained even under threat, and no use made of any medical knowledge
contrary to the laws of humanity.
For the purpose of this Declaration, torture is defined as the deliberate, systematic or wanton infliction of physical or
mental suffering by one or more persons acting alone or on the orders of any authority, to force another person to
yield information, to make a confession, or for any other reason.
DECLARATION
1.
The doctor shall not countenance, condone or participate in the practice of torture or other forms of cruel,
inhuman or degrading procedures, whatever the offence of which the victim of such procedures is suspected, accused or guilty, and whatever the victim’s beliefs or motives, and in all situations, including
armed conflict and civil strife.
2.
The doctor shall not provide any premises, instruments, substances or knowledge to facilitate the practice
of torture or other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or to diminish the ability of the victim to
resist such treatment.
3.
The doctor shall not be present during any procedure during which torture or other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment is used or threatened.
4.
A doctor must have complete clinical independence in deciding upon the care of a person for whom he or
she is medically responsible. The doctor’s fundamental role is to alleviate the distress of his or her fellow
men, and no motive whether personal, collective or political shall prevail against this higher purpose.
5.
Where a prisoner refuses nourishment and is considered by the doctor as capable of forming an unimpaired
and rational judgment concerning the consequences of such a voluntary refusal of nourishment, he or she
shall not be fed artificially. The decision as to the capacity of the prisoner to form such a judgment should
be confirmed by at least one other independent doctor. The consequences of the refusal of nourishment
shall be explained by the doctor to the prisoner.
6.
The World Medical Association will support, and should encourage the international community, the national medical associations and fellow doctors to support the doctor and his or her family in the face of
threats or reprisals resulting from a refusal to condone the use of torture or other forms of cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment.
Source: The World Medical Association. Declaration of Tokyo: Guidelines for Medical Doctors Concerning Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in Relation to Detention and Imprisonment. Adopted by the 29th World Medical Assembly,
Tokyo, Japan, October 1975. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World Medical
Association; 1993: Section 17.F.
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
STATEMENT ON PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE
Instances of physician-assisted suicide have recently become the focus of public attention. These instances involve
the use of a machine, invented by the physician who instructs the individual in its use. The individual thereby is
assisted in committing suicide. In other instances the physician has provided medication to the individual with
information as to the amount of dosage that would be lethal. The individual is thereby provided with the means for
committing suicide. To be sure, the individuals involved were seriously ill, perhaps even terminally ill, and were
wracked with pain. Furthermore, the individuals were apparently competent and made their own decision to commit
suicide. Patients contemplating suicide are frequently expressing the depression that accompanies terminal illness.
Physician-assisted suicide, like euthanasia, is unethical and must be condemned by the medical profession. Where
the assistance of the physician is intentionally and deliberately directed at enabling an individual to end his or her
own life, the physician acts unethically. However the right to decline medical treatment is a basic right of the patient
and the physician does not act unethically even if respecting such a wish results in the death of the patient.
Source: The World Medical Association. Statement on Physician-Assisted Suicide. Adopted by the 44th World Medical Assembly,
Marbella, Spain, September 1992. In: The World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Ferney-Voltaire, France: The World
Medical Association; 1993: Section 17.PP.
Mlitary Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today
771
1978 RED CROSS FUNDAMENTAL RULES
OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
APPLICABLE IN ARMED CONFLICTS
1.
Persons hors de combat and those who do not take a direct part in hostilities are entitled to respect for their
lives and physical and moral integrity. They shall in all circumstances be protected and treated humanely
without any adverse distinction.
2.
It is forbidden to kill or injure an enemy who surrenders or who is hors de combat.
3.
The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for by the party to the conflict which has them in its
power. Protection also covers medical personnel, establishments, transports and materiél. The emblem of
the red cross (red crescent, red lion and sun) is the sign of such protection and must be respected.
4.
Captured combatants and civilians under the authority of an adverse party are entitled to respect for their
lives, dignity, personal rights and convictions. They shall be protected against all acts of violence and reprisals. They shall have the right to correspond with their families and to receive relief.
5.
Everyone shall be entitled to benefit from fundamental judicial guarantees. No one shall be held responsible for an act he has not committed. No one shall be subjected to physical or mental torture, corporal
punishment or cruel or degrading treatment.
6.
Parties to a conflict and members of their armed forces do not have an unlimited choice of methods and
means of warfare. It is prohibited to employ weapons or methods of warfare of a nature to cause unnecessary losses or excessive suffering.
7.
Parties to a conflict shall at all times distinguish between the civilian population and combatants in order to
spare civilian population and property. Neither the civilian population as such nor civilian persons shall be
the object of attack. Attacks shall be directed solely against military objectives.
Source: 1978 Red Cross Fundamental Rules of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts. In: Roberts A,
Guelff R, eds. Documents on the Laws of War. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1989: 470.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
772
