A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
851
Chapter 27
A PROPOSED ETHIC FOR MILITARY
MEDICINE
THOMAS E. BEAM, MD*; AND EDMUND G. HOWE, MD, JD†
INTRODUCTION
A PROPOSED MILITARY MEDICAL ETHIC
Physician First, Officer Second?
Limited Exercise of Power
Compensatory Justice
THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESS
Military Medical Ethics Decision-Making Algorithm
Applying the Military Medical Ethics Decision-Making Algorithm
Conflicts Between Ethics and the Law: An Algorithm
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, United States Army; formerly, Director, Borden Institute, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington,
DC 20307-5001 and Medical Ethics Consultant to The Surgeon General, United States Army; formerly, Director, Operating Room, 28th
Combat Support Hospital (deployed to Saudi Arabia and Iraq, Persian Gulf War)
†Formerly Major, Medical Corps, United States Army; currently, Director, Programs in Ethics, Professor of Psychiatry, and Associate Professor of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, Maryland 20814; and Chair,
Committee of Department of Defense Ethics Consultants to the Surgeons General
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
852
Asclepius the healer, from ancient Greek mythology
Military medicine is the combination of two ancient professions—medicine and the military. The military medical
professional more often than not functions primarily as a physician, and only secondarily as a uniformed member of
the armed forces. When the need arises, however, the two professions merge in the person of the military physician.
This merging of professions is as old as the professions themselves. Indeed, in Greek mythology, the two sons of
Asclepius—Machaon and Polidarius—were both healers and warriors. In the US armed forces, military physicians
are not warriors in the sense of taking up arms to confront the enemy, unless their own lives, or those of their patients, are threatened.
Art: ©Araldo de Luca/CORBIS. Reproduced with permission.
A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
853
INTRODUCTION
That is, military physicians balance giving absolute
priority to the principle of military necessity (adopting a military role-specific ethic) with giving moral
weight to their traditional civilian medical priorities.
When they do the latter, they give patients’ interests some moral weight even though this conflicts
with interests that might further military interests.
However, as we will discuss later in this chapter,
there is a distinction between military necessity, which
is absolute, and military interests, which are not.
Difficulty arises in ascertaining what constitutes
true military necessity involving medical decisions.
Making this determination is among the most difficult ethical decisions military physicians and military medical leaders face. This chapter will propose
a decision-making process that could be used by
policy makers and military physicians. Understanding this process can help individual physicians accept those situations in which they must place the
needs of the military over those of their patients.
Individual physicians can also use the process in
their own practices when policy or guidance from
commanders is not clearly stated.
The preceding chapters have explored ethical
considerations arising in military medicine. It has
been emphasized throughout these discussions that
many of these considerations do not arise in civilian settings. Therefore, directly applying ethical
principles from civilian medical ethics may not be
appropriate in military medicine. The basic discrepancy between the two settings involves their goals
and how these goals can be achieved. In the military, the objective is to defeat the enemy; this often
involves killing enemy soldiers. When the mission
of protecting society requires it, all members of the
military must subordinate other value priorities to
effect this end of overpowering an enemy by whatever legal and moral means necessary. For military
physicians, this may involve sacrificing their patients’
interests when required by the military mission of
protecting society. Civilian doctors, in contrast, generally can focus on primary medical goals, such as
trying to save patients’ lives, or halt the spread of
disease. This same discrepancy in goals underlies
the core ethical quandary military physicians face,
which, in one way or another, permeates this book.
A PROPOSED MILITARY MEDICAL ETHIC
The tensions between a military doctor’s duties
to his patients and to the command (and society)
have been discussed extensively in the previous
chapters of these volumes. In this final chapter, we
will offer a proposed military medical ethic and use
a decision-making algorithm to suggest how physicians and policy makers might best go about balancing these competing values.
Physician First, Officer Second?
We propose as a basis for beginning discussion
that a military physician is primarily a physician
and in most instances makes decisions on this basis rather than as a military officer. Although this
statement appears to emphasize the differences between medicine and the military, the instances of
there being a significant conflict are very rare. In
general, excellent medical care for soldiers—as patients—is in the best interests of the soldier, the
physician, and the military. Therefore, in almost all
situations, the military physician thinks and acts as
a physician primarily and practices patient-centered
medicine. Lieutenant General Ronald Blanck,1 The
Surgeon General of the US Army from 1996 to 2000,
and others2–4 have advanced this position. The issue of a military physician being a military officer
usually does not become a factor in his decisions.
Society generally expects physicians, even physicians in uniform, to place the interests of patients,
including soldiers, above all other considerations.
However, society also expects military members to
sacrifice personal safety and comfort to “protect and
defend” its interests. Therefore, there are situations
in which the conflicting obligations (mixed agency)
become evident. In these situations, the military
physician will need to balance his duties to his patient with his obligations as a military officer or give
absolute priority to military needs.
In situations of military necessity, military physicians must give absolute priority to military needs.
Therefore, priority will appropriately be given to
protecting and defending society when society’s
interests would be significantly sacrificed as a result of not doing so. The United States Code5 allows the Secretary of the Army to direct the medical care of any individual on active duty. He may
determine that the needs of the Army are so significant that they must override those of the soldierpatient. Policy makers, both medical and tactical,
and medical leaders advise him on the pertinent
factors to assist him in making his decision.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
854
The original assumption—that military physicians are doctors first and officers second—may
seem to be contrary to this legal authority granted
to the Secretary of the Army. However it is an accurate description of the reality seen in military medicine. The concept that the soldier “belongs” to the
United States government with medical care routinely being forced upon the soldier is simply not
the case. Although statutory authority is in place
to address relatively unusual situations in which
enforced treatment is required to accomplish the
military mission, the Secretary of the Army rarely
mandates medical treatment. Therefore, the physician usually is able to maintain his medical identity and act as if he were a physician in a civilian
setting by respecting the autonomy of his soldierpatient.
The decision to override soldiers’ interests (as
patients) inevitably is, and should be, agonizing and
should not be exercised without significant, combat-related reasons for doing so. The best approach
to balancing these social and individual soldierpatient interests is to presume that autonomy of the
soldier as a patient is the primary force in medical
decision making but that exceptions can be justified by overarching societal requirements related
to the military’s mission.
The concept of a physician acting as a doctor first
and an officer second also implies that sometimes
the physician voluntarily limits exercising his
power because the soldier-patient is uniquely vulnerable to coercion. Exercising power may more
readily become unethical coercion within military
medicine than in the voluntary patient–physician
relationship seen in the civilian community. Thus,
this power should be more limited, as it has been
in some other contexts. Miranda-like warnings were
adopted in the military to protect soldiers from such
inherent coercion, for example, before they were
required in the civilian sector.
Limited Exercise of Power
In all medical decisions there is a significant imbalance of power within the patient–physician relationship (see Chapter 1, The Moral Foundations
of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence
of Medical Ethics). In civilian medicine, this is recognized as one of the reasons the principle of autonomy assumes a primary role in ethical decision
making. The patient is in a vulnerable position and
must be protected. This same vulnerability exists
within the military patient–physician relationship
but it is accentuated because of unique military
pressures. The military is a hierarchical organization and its operation is based on the presumption
of obedience. This is required for its primary mission of protecting society. Orders must be obeyed
promptly and questioned only in rare cases of almost certain illegality or immorality. Although there
are procedures for refusing to obey an order,6 circumstances that require a soldier to exercise this
option are, and should be, extremely rare. However,
this deference to the authority of superiors makes
soldiers much more likely to be vulnerable when
medical decisions regarding them are made. Further, all military physicians are officers, and primarily field grade officers (majors and above). This
enhances the presumption that their advice will be
followed. Because it is more difficult for military
patients to choose, or change, their physician, they
may feel more obligated to accept the physician’s
advice.
The military physician also may be more likely
than his civilian colleague to become used to exercising his authority. Although civilian physicians
have obvious symbols of their status and power
(their “uniform” consists of the white coat and
stethoscope), the military physician wears his rank
visibly and his power comes not only from his
knowledge and training as a physician but also from
his being commissioned as an officer in the military. In military contexts, his orders, ethically as
well as legally, are to be obeyed. The subtle difference between military orders and medical ones can
become blurred and this could lead to an abuse of
the physician’s power. It is important to remember,
however, that the military physician does not have
legal authority to order a soldier-patient to undergo
treatment. This authority is given to the soldier’s
commander or, in rare circumstances, the hospital
commander. The soldier-patient, however, is more
likely to defer to the authority of any superior officer (including medical officers) and this perception increases his vulnerability.
Another concern arises because the military physician may overidentify with his military unit.
(Chapter 13, Medical Ethics on the Battlefield: The
Crucible of Military Medical Ethics, addresses this
in greater detail.) This can occur because of the military training and conditioning he receives, particularly if he is a member of an elite unit. 7 This overidentification with the military unit may result in
his modeling his medical orders on a military model.
This also can significantly increase the likelihood of
an abuse of power. The military physician must be
extremely aware of this possibility and be vigilant
to prevent this abuse from occurring.
For these reasons, more restraint should be applied in military medical decision making than in
A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
855
the civilian sector. The line of restraint must be
drawn clearly and, indeed, more closely for the
military physician than his civilian colleague.
Compensatory Justice
Another concept that we believe merits moral
weight is that of compensatory justice. This concept
was introduced in Chapter 26, A Look Toward the
Future, but will be amplified here. Although the
military has an obligation to fulfill its mission to
protect society, society has a reciprocal obligation
to those who have willingly placed themselves in
harm’s way. One of the ways this could be accomplished is by providing soldiers, in appropriate contexts, “compensatory justice.” Soldiers sacrifice
much in performing their duty to society. They, of
course, may die in service to their country. They also
give up many of the freedoms that American citizens enjoy. These freedoms, ironically, are in many
cases those that, as soldiers, they may die to preserve (see Chapter 9, The Soldier and Autonomy).
This loss of freedom is necessary to preserve the
“good order and discipline” in the armed forces that
enables the armed forces to accomplish their mission of protecting society. Therefore, society owes
a great debt of gratitude to its protectors.
Because of this debt, society should support the
military’s choosing to compensate its members in
special ways. This is fair and appropriate. The government provides special pay for those in combat,
income tax exemptions for portions of their pay, and
other tangible expressions of gratitude for dangerous service. Individual members of society may
choose to express their gratitude as well. During
and after recent conflicts many businesses and individuals have made special benefits available to
soldiers, including donating free rooms in hotels,
offering special travel opportunities to resorts or
tourist attractions, and deferring interest payments
on purchases made by soldiers.
Military medicine has opportunities as well to
compensate its beneficiaries in extra ways. Free access to medical care for soldiers and their families
and free dental care for soldiers have been benefits
associated with military service. Some programs,
such as using DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) analysis to identify remains of soldiers even after they
have left active duty, may give special benefits as
well. In evaluating new technologies and procedures
(as seen in Chapter 26), policy decision makers also
can choose to include promising treatments or programs that benefit soldiers and their families. This
can be justified as special compensation for harms,
both actual and potential, associated with military
service. This is the concept of compensatory justice.
Fig. 27-1. Military medical ethics decision making.
Is this a case 
of military 
necessity?
No
High
Yes
Low
No
Yes
The soldier's 
autonomy prevails
Is there
benefit to the
military
mission?
How significant
is any risk 
to the soldier?
The needs 
of the 
military 
and its 
mission 
must 
prevail
THE DECISION–MAKING PROCESS
As stated before, decisions requiring prioritizing
the conflicting goals of the military and of medicine can be the most difficult military leaders and
military physicians face. The following algorithms
are offered not as the definitive “solution” to these
dilemmas but as a means for examining the process used to arrive at the decision. As will be seen,
there are uncertainties and ambiguities inherent in
all decisions. This is particularly true in those involving both clinical medicine and combat. The
basic decision often becomes that of determining
who “gets” to make the decision and once that determination is made, what criteria are the appropriate ones for deciding. There can be a conflict in
moral views—the military priority of the mission
as opposed to the medical priority of the individual
patient.
Military Medical Ethics Decision-Making
Algorithm
Another way to further protect soldiers might be
to follow loose guidelines of a decision-making algorithm to help determine appropriate use of this
increased power and to help avoid its misuse. We
propose a decision matrix for consideration (Figure 27-1). The algorithm as presented here is greatly
streamlined; one should not assume that complicated decisions could necessarily be made in these
few steps. However, this simplified version clariMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 2
856
fies a process that may be optimal. Thus it can be
useful to policy makers and military physicians in
making optimal moral decisions. We will describe
the decision-making process using the algorithm
and give examples of some possible applications.
Decision Point #1: Assessing Military Necessity
The first decision point is that of military necessity. This concept has been discussed in previous
chapters and is briefly reiterated here in this chapter. Simply stated, there are situations in which
military needs are likely to be absolute. This occurs
whenever the completion of the mission could be
significantly affected. As discussed previously, the
survival of the society is the ultimate end of the
military profession. Because this goal is absolute,
the needs of individuals must be considered secondary and ethically can be overridden by military
necessity. Situations requiring this are not common,
but they are frequent enough to cause controversy
and can generate much emotion. Even if military
necessity exists only in the rarest of situations, determining when it exists requires someone to make
this judgment. As previously discussed, the Secretary of the Army or his designee has the statutory
authority to determine if and when this military
necessity exists.
In situations of military necessity, soldier autonomy can (and should) be overridden. For example, a soldier can legally be ordered to risk his
life to attack an enemy’s fortified position if the
overall mission requires this. Analogously, soldiers
give up a certain amount of their autonomy in medical decisions as well. Similarly, physicians in the
military also have their autonomy limited in certain circumstances. Physicians can be ordered to
treat soldiers, even if soldiers refuse treatment, if
military necessity is present. The military has this
right and, due to its mission to protect society, has
an affirmative obligation to do so.
Yet, if soldiers are to be placed in harm’s way, a
just society has an obligation to provide whatever
protection it can to those soldiers. Society can expect all safe and effective protective measures to be
used for its sons and daughters serving in the military. It is possible that the soldiers can’t be fully
informed about all the potential risks they face, but
education may help soldiers anticipate when their
autonomy may be overridden on the basis of military necessity. Education may also prevent some of
the controversies that have occurred recently in situations in which it has been determined that overriding soldiers’ autonomy is necessary.
To illustrate the strength of the justification underlying military physicians following this principle, they should adhere to it even when soldiers
are subject to the draft. When military service is
voluntary, persons can avoid these mandatory measures and the bodily intrusiveness they may bring
about by not volunteering. If there is a draft, they
have no choice. Conscription is itself justifiable on
grounds that are wholly consistent with the foregoing ethical analysis. Its justification lies solely in
its being necessary for the nation’s survival.
Decision Point #2: Providing Benefit to the
Military
If the situation is not one of military necessity,
but rather one of merely providing benefit to the
military, the second algorithm decision point arises.
In discussing benefit to the military, it is important
to distinguish that this benefit is not financial or
some vague organizational benefit. Counting these
gains as benefit would allow almost any decision
to be interpreted as beneficial to the military. The
definition of benefit intended here is instead one
that truly benefits the mission the military is assigned—to protect and defend the country. Thus,
the benefit is actually ultimately to society. It must
be directly beneficial to the accomplishment of the
mission. If this strict definition of benefit is not satisfied, the military should not override the soldier’s
right to make his own decision in medical interventions. This is analogous to the harm principle more
fully discussed in Chapter 9, The Soldier and Autonomy. If there is true benefit to the military, using the strict definition of benefit, the next algorithm
decision point, looking at the risk to the soldier,
occurs.
Decision Point #3: Assessing Risk to the Soldier
In situations in which there is a true benefit to
the military as defined above, the risk posed by the
medical intervention to the soldier must be balanced against that benefit. This is a familiar decision matrix for all clinicians because this is the
model for medical recommendations used in the
daily practice of medicine. We maintain that if there
is high risk to the soldier and if there is no true military necessity, but rather only benefit to the military mission, the soldier’s autonomy in medical
decisions should not be overridden. This may help
prevent abuses of power in making these decisions.
As previously discussed, because there is such a
power inequality within the military, and because
A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
857
soldiers must of necessity give up their autonomy
in many nonmedical military situations, drawing
the line on the side of protecting their remaining
autonomy under these circumstances is ethically not
only defensible but optimal. In so doing, abuses of
military physicians’ and commanders’ power may
be decreased.
Conversely, if the benefit to the military mission
is significant and the risk to the soldier is minimal,
there is a stronger argument to override the soldier’s
autonomy. The soldier has accepted a certain limitation of his autonomy. He has accepted the mission of protecting his country, even at the risk of
losing his life. Therefore, it is only consistent that
he should accept some level of personal risk when
the benefit to the military is substantial. In this case,
we believe it is appropriate to override the soldier’s
autonomy for the benefit of the military mission.
We recognize that the terms “limited,” “significant,” “high,” and “low” are not absolute. There is
always a considerable level of uncertainty in these
policy decisions. This also raises the other obvious
issue of who has the right to assign these terms both
now and in the future. Legally, as stated before, the
Secretary of the Army or his designee, advised by
his medical and tactical commanders, has this right.
This raises the additional issue of assigning levels of risk and benefit to decisions whose impact
will only become clear in the future. As discussed
in Chapter 12, Ethical Issues in Military Medicine,
it may be necessary for the commander, informed
by experts on his staff, to make ethical and legal
decisions based on his view of the situation, because
only he has the ultimate overall vision and responsibility for making the decisions that will affect the
entire situation. The medical officer must participate as one of these experts, and can certainly offer
a soldier-patient–centered focus, but ultimately
policy decisions need to be made by the policy
makers, and in the military this function resides in
the chain of command. Representatives of the Judge
Advocate General will also be involved in these
decisions. The previous discussion reviewed the
ethical bases for decision making but the relevant
laws and regulations must always be considered.
In fact, they usually warrant the most moral weight
in determining what physicians should do.
Applying the Military Medical Ethics DecisionMaking Algorithm
We will now provide some examples and show
how they can be analyzed using the military medical ethics decision-making algorithm (Figure 27-1).
The initial examples, which will be examined in
some detail, involve policy decisions. The individual physician can use them to understand how
policy decisions are made. They can also help him
understand the competing loyalties he may feel in
these situations and, more particularly, that though
they may cause emotional pain, this does not mean
they are “wrong.” Other examples from individual
clinical situations will be mentioned to demonstrate
the application of the algorithm in the patient–physician relationship.
Policy Applications
Three areas of policy applications will be explored in this discussion: (1) acting when military
necessity prevails; (2) balancing military benefit
with individual risk; and (3) acting when there is
minimal military benefit.
When Military Necessity Prevails. A recent context in which military physicians have had an absolute obligation to place the military’s interests
first is when prophylactic agents may have been
needed to protect soldiers from the effects of biological and chemical weaponry. This occurred during the Persian Gulf War (1990–1991). As is discussed
in Chapter 12 (Mixed Agency in Military Medicine:
Ethical Roles in Conflict), it was then feared that
Saddam Hussein, the leader of Iraq and its military,
might use this weaponry. This fear continued until
the removal of Hussein from power in 2003.
The question arose whether the use of protective
agents determined to have benefit should be mandatory or voluntary. Because this weaponry could
have been deadly, it was decided that although
these agents had not been fully tested on humans
for this battlefield purpose, their use should be
mandatory. 8 Again, as discussed in Chapter 12, the
justification for this was military necessity. If soldiers were not protected from chemical and biological agents, many of them would have died had the
agents been used. 9 The military leaders, both combat and medical, felt that the threat that these agents
may be used was credible. If inordinate numbers of
soldiers died or were incapacitated because of their
exposure to these agents, the battle or even the entire war could have been lost. It was necessary,
therefore, to require soldiers to use these agents.
On the algorithm, the first decision point indicates that if it is militarily necessary for the accomplishment of the mission, the proposed intervention may legitimately be required. Obviously, in
making this decision, the leaders must examine the
expected risks and benefits of all courses of action
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
858
before making a decision. Their intent is to protect
the fighting force to enable it to accomplish the
mission.
Subsequent events bring the ethical conflict
raised by this question still more sharply into focus. Many service persons after returning from the
Persian Gulf presented with symptoms that have
been grouped together, designated as the Gulf War
illnesses. The etiology of these symptoms remains
unclear. 10,11 Nonetheless, some persons believe that
the use of these protective agents and this syndrome
may be related. The anger some feel highlights the
reality that when military physicians override soldiers’ autonomy, even on the grounds of military
necessity, the long-term adverse consequences may
be considerable.
More recently, since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, deaths have occurred due to anthrax being sent through the federal mail system.
This outcome highlights why the use of some of
these protective agents may be a military necessity.
One of the authors (EGH) participated in the discussion concerning the ethics of using prophylactic agents, including vaccines against biological
weaponry, prior to the Persian Gulf War. The decision-making process was very similar to that just
described for other agents used in the Persian Gulf
War. Had Saddam Hussein used biological weaponry, many thousands of soldiers could have been
killed and the war could have been lost. This risk
could not be allowed. The decision in response to
this threat now is to attempt to protect all service
members from anthrax by vaccination. 12
This policy has been adopted because the risk to
soldiers from vaccination is minimal and the benefit to the soldier, the military, and society, is felt to
be significant. 13,14
This policy is, and should be, continually reevaluated as events and circumstances change. An organization outside the Department of Defense (DoD)
may be able to examine the policy with more objectivity, or at least may be perceived as more objective.
To further these ends, the Institute of Medicine, an
organization clearly independent from the DoD,
was invited to evaluate the safety and effectiveness
of the anthrax vaccine. Although the study was
funded by the military, that did not influence the
committee. In fact, as Dr. Brian Strom, the chair of
the committee, asserts: “If [the committee] had a
bias to begin with, it probably was against the military. I felt we just had to turn over the right stone
and we’d find a smoking gun out there. But we
didn’t find it, and we looked hard.”15(p951) Their report, which was made public in 2002, clearly supports the conclusion that the vaccine is safe and effective. Further, it is likely to be effective against
all strains of anthrax because it targets the toxin and
not the cell. Independent reviews such as this can
assist those establishing policy to be certain that the
interventions will indeed improve the mission capability.
In civilian contexts, societies requiring persons
to take such agents or to face criminal sanctions
generally would be legally impermissible and ethically reprehensible. However, even in the civilian
context, citizens’ freedom can be curtailed to protect
the greater population. This occurs, for example,
when persons in a region need to be quarantined.
The principle underlying military physicians’ acting on the basis of necessity in military and civilian
contexts is, in fact, the same. 16 Society has a right to
require some degree of sacrifice from its citizens to
protect the health and well-being of other members
of the society. However, it is likely that a military
physician will encounter this situation more frequently in his career than would a civilian physician. 17 Military physicians’ obligation to respond on
the basis of this necessity is absolute in principle.
However, they still must exercise moral discretion
when responding. When deciding whether a prophylactic agent should be used, military physicians
and leaders must assess the relative benefits and
burdens. 18 The point at which this ratio is sufficiently high that an agent’s use should be made
mandatory is, of course, an ethical decision.
All medical decisions involve ethical judgments
because the benefits must be judged as worth the
risk and there cannot help but be differing moral
views on when this point has been reached. This is
readily apparent in regard to new biological threats
such as the present threat of smallpox. 19,20 Here, the
benefits versus burdens are well established clinically. 21 Yet, when, and for whom, this vaccination
should be reinstituted requires some persons’ judgment. The question whether prophylactic agents
should be used (and who should decide) becomes
still more complicated when the military occupies
a foreign territory. Should citizens in an occupied
country be offered protection? Should prisoners of
war be offered protection?22,23 We believe it would be
optimal for the protection to be offered, but we realize there may be inadequate supplies. Once again,
the ethical judgment involves prioritizing the needs
of potential patients with other needs of society.
Likewise, new biological or chemical weapons
may be developed by hostile nations. If they are
developed, efforts must and will be undertaken to
find prophylactic agents quickly. 24,25 Whether such
A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
859
agents, just developed, should be used to protect
soldiers, despite their being new, is an ethical judgment involving their relative benefits versus burdens. An ethical question that also always will be
present when supplies are limited is whose needs
should be prioritized. This is currently being debated in regard to available supplies of anthrax vaccine. To be consistent with the principle of military
necessity, the vaccine first should be given to all
those most needed to win the war. Only thereafter
should the recipient pool be expanded. Who should
be included in this first group and how far its margins should reach requires, of course, an ethical
judgment.
It is critically important for military physicians
to be aware of this inconsistency (between having
to adopt a military role-specific ethic due to military necessity on one hand, but still having to exercise moral judgment in implementing this ethic on
the other) when they apply the algorithm introduced above. When adopting a military role-specific ethic, they must know that though in principle
their obligation is absolute, in implementing this
principle they will never be able to avoid applying
ethical discretion. Therefore, when military physicians seek to use the algorithm we have proposed,
they should feel wholly justified in acting inflexibly and according to their role-specific military
ethic if and when this is required by military necessity. However, they should feel justified to do
this if, and only if, this is militarily required. They
should remain aware, however, that notwithstanding their total justification in making this choice,
there are many ethical judgments they cannot avoid
in its implementation.
Military Benefit Balanced With Individual Risk.
An example demonstrating attempts to balance the
benefits to the military against the risks to the individual is that of epidemiologic studies of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) when the disease
was first identified. Because homosexual contact
was a factor in the spread of the infection, it was
important to assess its prevalence. Yet, homosexuality was, and remains, a ground for discharge from
the military. 26 If HIV positive soldiers admitted that
they were homosexual during questioning about
their risk factors, under normal circumstances they
would have risked being involuntarily separated
from the military. The military, on the other hand,
obtained benefit from ascertaining the true etiology
of HIV infection. In this instance, the benefit to the
military, as well as the risk to the soldier from being identified as homosexual, is clear. Several policy
decisions were made over time to attempt to resolve
this issue.
In 1985, Casper Weinberger, then the Secretary
of Defense, made the decision to allow confidentiality for soldiers who acknowledged their homosexuality during epidemiological studies, but not
if their homosexuality was discovered under other
circumstances. 27 Congress expanded this protection
through legislation in 1986 by precluding not only
involuntary separation, but also other adverse actions that could negatively influence the soldier’s
career. 28 This decision regarded the benefit the military obtained from accurate data concerning the
etiology of HIV infection as being so significant that
special legal provisions were enacted to attempt to
minimize the real risk of harm to soldiers. It placed
less weight on benefits accrued to the military from
identifying and separating homosexual soldiers as
long as they were not identifiable by other means
(ie, as long as they were discreet).
On the other hand, the protection did not extend
to security clearances. If soldiers were found to be
homosexual, even through epidemiological assessment, their security clearances could be denied or
revoked. 29,30 The apparent rationale for this decision
seems to be the assessment that homosexual soldiers did represent a higher likelihood of being compromised because of their sexual preferences than
did heterosexual soldiers. The military perceived
the benefit from preventing a breach of security as
outweighing the risk of harm to the soldier.
Although this assessment of the factors involved
in this particular decision may not be the only interpretation possible, it serves as a good example
of policy makers balancing risks and benefits in
making their decisions. Furthermore, it demonstrates the model of civilian oversight of the military that exists in the United States.
Minimal Military Benefit. A final policy issue
that will be analyzed using the decision-making
algorithm is that of the DNA repository. Using DNA
technology, the military has been able to identify
remains of soldiers from previous battles, including the remains of Air Force First Lieutenant
Michael Blassie as the Unknown Soldier of the Vietnam War. 31 The technique involves the use of DNA
taken from the remains of an unidentified soldier
and comparing it with DNA taken from living family members of missing soldiers. It is far superior
to using other forms of identification, including fingerprints, scars and blemishes, or dental records.
The DNA used in this technique is found in the
mitochondria of all cells and is passed within the
ovum of the mother to her children. 32 If there are
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
860
consistent similarities on the mitochondrial DNA
patterns, the military may be able to identify the
previously unidentified remains of a soldier. Obviously this requires some element of chance and luck,
in that there are many soldiers missing in action
and, although circumstances can narrow the potential matches somewhat, there is still a large pool of
potential matches. It is also possible that the mother
and siblings of the soldier may not be available to
donate cells for DNA testing.
This uncertainty and, to some degree, the amount
of DNA to be examined for similarity can be overcome by having actual DNA from the soldier. In
1992, the Department of Defense established a repository of DNA samples to be used for this purpose with samples of blood and other cells. 33 All
members of the military, active duty and reserve,
were required to supply these samples.
The possible benefit for families is a compelling
argument in favor of offering this to soldiers. They
can be spared the horror of wondering if their loved
one is suffering in a prisoner of war camp somewhere. Families can then proceed through the grieving process as well as finalizing legal and financial
documents.
The ability to identify remains is not, however,
militarily necessary for the mission to succeed.
However, it may be beneficial to the military to be
able to identify its dead and to change the status of
the soldier from missing to deceased. Other soldiers
may benefit as well from knowing that remains can
be promptly and accurately identified. It would also
be beneficial to the soldier to know that his family
would be spared the uncertainty of not knowing if
he were dead or a prisoner of war. The military services have established the goal of never having an
unidentified soldier in future conflicts.
The next question in the algorithm involves risk
to the individual. There is a risk that the DNA could
be used in ways that would harm the person, such
as potential invasion of privacy. DNA carries unique
information and this information can be used not
only for remains identification, but also for prediction of genetic diseases. For example, genetic profiling for career advancement or medical insurance
are possible harms that could come from the misuse of this information. However, the DNA repository does not analyze the DNA for genetic diseases
because the samples would be used only for comparison with DNA taken from the unidentified remains of a US service member. 34
In 1996, the Department of Defense issued a
policy clarifying four possible uses of the DNA as
(1) identification of human remains, (2) internal
quality assurance activities, (3) other activities for
which the donor or surviving next of kin specifically consents, and (4) court-ordered examination
for prosecution of serious crimes and only after review by the Department of Defense General Counsel. 35–37 Although safeguards have been established
to help prevent potential harms, there are still concerns about them as evidenced by several service
members refusing to have their DNA taken and
stored. Some of these were even tried by court martial and found guilty of refusing a lawful order. 38
Depending on the determination of the risk to
the soldier, it would be possible to decide to require
soldiers to submit the DNA samples, or to decide
to make participation in the DNA remains identification program voluntary depending on the weighting of conflicting values. Of course, if there is no
true benefit to the military mission, the soldier’s
autonomy should not be overridden.
In summary, these three areas of policy application—(1) when military necessity prevails, (2) military benefit balanced with individual risk, and (3)
minimal military benefit—represent the continuum
along which these different decisions can be made.
Clinical Examples
The algorithm can also be applied in the clinical
setting. Chapter 12 demonstrates this with the discussions of situations that require adopting a military role-specific ethic, situations in which discretion should be applied, and situations in which a
medical role-specific ethic possibly should be
adopted. An example of using the algorithm in a
clinical situation requiring a military role-specific
ethic because military necessity is absolute is that
of treating combat stress disorder. In Chapter 12,
Howe states that a floodgate phenomenon could
occur if combat stress disorder is treated by evacuation from the theater. This could significantly affect the military’s being able to accomplish its mission. To avoid this likelihood, soldiers with combat
stress disorder must be returned to duty, even if this
violates their wishes.
The example of the alcoholic general (in Case
Study 12-1), in which the wife revealed to her physician that her husband (a commanding general)
was an alcoholic, is an example demonstrating a
high risk to the patient (the wife in this example—
her marriage and her relationship with the physician) and the expected low level of benefit to the
military (by having the general’s addiction identified). The risk in this case was judged to be greater
than the benefit to the military. If the general were
A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
861
impaired significantly, or if his level of responsibility were great enough, the opposite decision could
possibly have been made based on a higher level of
benefit to the military and this level approaching
military necessity.
A possible example of there being essentially no
benefit to the military is that of the affair (discussed
in Case Study 12-4) in which the physician wanted
to report his patient after the patient admitted to
an adulterous relationship. The physician’s colleagues were convinced that there was a negligible
benefit to the military in exposing the affair and that,
if there were no benefit, it should not be reported.
These clinical examples demonstrate the varying
application of the algorithm, based on the physician assigning values to the competing goals. This
is a familiar model to all clinicians, in that assessing risk/benefit ratios is a basis for all clinical decision making. Applying a similar model to ethical
decision making is a reasonable extension of a basic clinical skill.
Conflicts Between Ethics and the Law:
An Algorithm
Another difficult dilemma arises when law and
ethics appear to be in conflict. A discussion of the
legal basis of military medicine was presented in
detail in Chapter 12, Mixed Agency in Military
Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict. The military
physician must also have some knowledge of military law and of the law of warfare (as discussed in
Chapter 8, Just War Doctrine and the International
Law of War), as well as of those laws applying specifically to medicine (as discussed in Chapter 23,
Military Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions
Today). If a military physician has doubts about the
legal requirements of military medicine, he should
consult with others who have more experience with
these issues, whether they are members of the Judge
Advocate General Corps or more senior military
physicians who have dealt with such matters in the
past. It is essential that individual physicians understand the legally imposed limits on their autonomy required by the military mission when exercising discretion to avoid suboptimal outcomes
for their soldier-patients, themselves, and the military overall. In some instances, for example, the law
should warrant great weight; in others, legal requirements may be absent and thus warrant little,
if any, weight.
At the same time, the physician needs to be aware
that decisions made using ethical analysis may not
be the same as those made using legal analysis.
When the two differ, the most difficult questions
regarding discretion may arise. This conflict will be
explored using another algorithm (Figure 27-2). The
process involved is similar to that available to all
soldiers if they are concerned about the legality of
an order; therefore commanders are familiar with
this concept. As already stated, these issues are extremely complex. Thus, although the algorithm
given may help frame the discussion and provide
some basis for identifying underlying assumptions
and initially proceeding, no simplified decision
matrix can “solve” ethical dilemmas.
Generally a legal analysis generates the same
conclusion as ethical analysis. Malpractice lawyers
Fig. 27-2. Conflicts between ethics and the law.
Do ethical and 
legal analyses
agree?
Yes
Yes
Preserve life
even if
contrary to
legal opinion
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Exercise
option to
refuse
to obey
Is this a "life
or death"
situation?
Is there
disagreement
among
lawyers?
Ethics and
legal advisors
meet with
commander
and attempt to
convince him.
Does ethics
analysis 
prevail?
Can ethics
advisor abide
with
commander's
decision?
Is the legal
disagreement
resolved to
agree with
ethical
analysis?
Proceed with the 
course of action 
decided upon
No
No
No
No
No
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
862
thus say rightly that the best protection from lawsuits is to practice good medicine. Practicing good
clinical medicine is practicing not only legally good
medicine, but ethically good medicine as well.
However, the law provides only a “good” minimum
level of practice (what one must do or must not do
to prevent lawsuits), whereas ethics provides a
higher level of practice (what one ought to do). Practicing good ethical medicine would thus not only
satisfy the legal requirements but also meet a higher
standard of patient care.
There is significant moral weight due the law.
Legal traditions have been developed through a rigorous series of examinations, cross-examinations,
challenges, and astute judgments. Moreover, the
law warrants respect even when it conflicts with
ethics because it represents the best practice for
deciding policy when persons dissent. Society therefore rightly expects the military, and military physicians, to operate within the constraints of the law.
However, there are occasions in which the decision
suggested by the legal advisors may differ from that
determined by ethical analysis. This occurs in civilian medicine as well and can cause discomfort
in ethics committees and ethics consultants. In ethics consultations, it is important for legal interpretations to be subject to challenge and discussion.
The lawyer’s interpretation should not automatically shut down all further discussion.
Furthermore, lawyers can (and often do) disagree
on specific interpretations of the law, so an individual lawyer’s interpretation of the law may not
reflect the only way the law can be applied. It also
may not be the only law applicable or the most appropriate law for the situation. And in many cases
the law does not yet exist. Statutes dealing with an
ethically conflicted situation sometimes have not
yet been enacted and precedent cases may have not
yet been adjudicated. When one of the courses of
action would lead to the death of the patient, it is
appropriate to continue with actions that preserve
the patient’s life until all issues are resolved. This
last point is best illustrated by a case.
Case Study 27-1 The Inappropriate Surrogate. An
elderly man with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
was admitted to a hospital in another state for increasing
respiratory distress. While in that hospital, and while he
had decision-making capacity, he crafted a durable power
of attorney document, naming his fiancé as the person
he appointed to make decisions for him, should he be
unable to do so. His clinical condition continued to worsen
and he was transferred to a military tertiary medical center. While at the military medical center, he verbally informed the attending physician that he wanted his fiancé
to participate in medical decision making. He continued
to deteriorate and was transferred to the Intensive Care
Unit and was placed on the ventilator after indicating to
the physician and his fiancé that he wanted a trial of maximum medical therapy. He became incapable of participating in decision making. His wife (their divorce was
completed except for the judge’s ruling, which was expected within a week) arrived and ordered the ventilator
discontinued. The fiancé stated that he was still early
enough in the trial period that he would not want the ventilator removed. The hospital attorney advised that the
durable power of attorney was only a general one and
did not grant medical decision making to the fiancé, and
that the spouse was the legally recognized surrogate even
though they were estranged and almost divorced. Until
the divorce became final, the spouse had decision-making authority.
Comment: This case demonstrates a conflict between
the hospital attorney’s view and the unanimous opinion of the
ethics consultants, as well as the healthcare team. If the
expressed wishes of the spouse were to be followed (which
was advised by the attorney) this would likely lead to the
patient’s death. In this case the decision was made to appeal the attorney’s decision and to continue medical treatment until the ethical and legal issues could be resolved.
For the military physician, this conflict can be
extremely difficult, but it should not be impossible
to resolve. The lawyer is the legal advisor to the
commander and the ethics consultant advises on
ethics. In situations of disagreement, the commander needs good advice from each; he ultimately
will make the decision. In the military today, the
surgeon general of each service has an ethics consultant to help him as he makes decisions that have
ethical implications. Local commanders (and individual military physicians) can ask this consultant
or a local ethics committee for assistance when
making these decisions. Once the commander
makes his decision, the physician is still, however,
a moral agent and must choose how to act in light
of these recommendations. If the physician is morally opposed to the commander’s decision, he
should inform his commander about his moral dilemma and discuss alternatives. If the situation cannot be resolved, he could request to be relieved from
the situation, he could resign from the military, or
he could disobey and suffer the consequences of this
decision. The physician can also request a review
and ruling from a higher level in the chain of command. These actions must be carefully considered
but it will not usually be necessary to proceed to
this point. Still, military physicians must be willing to act independently of the law if and when this
seems ethically necessary. In emergency situations
it may be optimal, for example, to err on the side of
A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
863
preserving a patient’s life by not making a decision
that is likely to shorten a patient’s life when delaying is necessary to allow a more considered decision. This was exemplified in the case just given.
Another, more obvious, example occurred in Germany during World War II. Laws that were enacted
were clearly immoral, and could have been disobeyed.
Disobeying them would have consequences, possibly
severe ones, but physicians could have accepted this
in order to obey their consciences. As we have seen in
earlier chapters, acting in conscience has risks, but this
is required for persons of moral character. It will also
raise moral standards in an organization. 39 Conversely,
physicians who went along with Nazi policies were
tried and convicted of crimes against humanity. Attempts to defend their actions by claiming that they
were just following orders were unsuccessful. Particularly in a democratic society such as the United States,
acting in conscience by challenging immoral laws is
more likely to change the laws.
CONCLUSION
This final chapter reemphasizes the tension underlying mixed agency, or conflicting loyalty, issues.
Some aspects of these are unique in the military.
There are extraordinary potential differences between the realities military and civilian physicians
face. Nonetheless, the ethical priorities both would
adhere to under the same extreme circumstances are
the same. The examples of military necessity and
civilian quarantine for infectious disease are illustrative. Both give highest priority to saving the
greatest number of lives. In these situations the conflict is between two goals (protecting an individual
patient’s interests and saving many lives), each of
which is generally considered morally weighty. However, the military physician is likely to face these issues more frequently than his civilian colleague.
Civilian physicians have faced mixed agency issues as well. Physicians in sports medicine, penal
institutions, and other situations in which they are
employed by an organization experience conflicting loyalties similar to their military colleagues. The
goals here conflicting with the patient’s best interests, however, are not as clearly warranting of moral
weight in all of these cases. Mixed agency issues are,
however, becoming increasingly obvious in medical practice today as managed care models become
prevalent. In some systems, there are pressures to
avoid tests or procedures because they are expensive,
even when they may be beneficial to the patient.
Several chapters in these volumes have attempted to provide some assistance to military physicians when they are faced with seemingly irreconcilable conflicts. The example in Chapter 12 of
the submarine crew member who had to close the
hatch on his fellow sailor in order to save the rest
of the crew is illustrative. The sailor continued to
have sorrow many years later over his comrade’s
death, but he did not feel guilt over his decision to
close the hatch. This situation is analogous to a military physician’s having to place priority for true
military necessity over the needs of his patient.
Once again, however, the conflict exists between
two goals (service to the military mission of protecting society and service to the individual patient
or sailor), both of which warrant moral weight.
As has been emphasized in this chapter, the military physician is a physician first and usually can
continue to place his patient’s interests first. It is
the uncommon situation that requires placing priority on military necessity. However, as has been
seen, these situations can and do arise. If military
and civilian policy makers and military physicians
providing care have been able to examine these issues as discussed in these volumes, and are able to
apply these analyses to specific dilemmas, they may
be more able to make very difficult decisions and
justifiably be more able to live with them. The physician who serves in the military is in the best position to study the dilemmas and, by having examined them prior to being in an emergency situation
(for example, in combat), is best able to attempt to
resolve them appropriately. We hope this chapter,
as well as all of the chapters in these two volumes,
will generate further analysis and can help military
physicians accomplish their mission in the most
ethical manner possible.
REFERENCES
1.
Lieutenant General Ronald R. Blanck (Retired), formerly The Surgeon General, US Army. Personal Communication, May 2002.
2.
Jeffer EK. Medical units: Who should command? Mil Med. 1990;155:413–417.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
864
3.
Jeffer EK. Command of military medical units: Grounding the paradigm. Mil Med. 1996;161:346–348.
4.
Moore WL Jr, DeDonato DM, Frisina ME. An Ethical Basis for Military Medicine. A working draft of a paper
proposal. January 1995.
5.
United States Code, Title 10. Armed Forces, Subtitle B. Army, Part II. Personnel Chapter 355. Hospitalization,
Section. 3723. Approved 13 November 1998.
6.
Meyer JM, Bill BJ. Operational Law Handbook. Charlottesville, Va: International and Operational Law Department, The Judge Advocate General’s School; 2002.
7.
Haritos-Fatouros M. The official torturer: A learning model for obedience to the authority of violence. J Appl
Soc Psychol. 1998;18(13):1107–1120.
8.
Howe EG, Martin E. The use of investigational drugs without obtaining servicepersons’ consent in the Persian
Gulf. Hastings Cent Rep. 1991;21:21–24.
9.
Cieslak TJ, Rowe JR, Kortepeter MG, et al. A field-expedient algorithmic approach to the clinical management
of chemical and biological casualties. Mil Med. 2000;165(9):659–662.
10.
Ferrari R, Russell AS. The problem of Gulf War syndrome. Med Hypotheses. 2001;56(6):697–701.
11.
Howe EG. The Gulf War syndrome and the military medic: Whose agent is the physician? In: Zeman A, Emanuel
LL, eds. Ethical Dilemmas in Neurology. London: WB Saunders Co; 2000: 139–156.
12.
Nass M. Anthrax vaccine: Model of a response to the biologic warfare threat. Infect Dis Clin North Am.
1999;13(1):187–208.
13.
Blanck RR. Anthrax vaccination is based on medical evidence. Am J Public Health. 2000;90(8):1326–1327.
14.
Surveillance for adverse events associated with anthrax vaccination: US Department of Defense, 1998–2000.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2000;49(16):341–345.
15.
Strom B. As cited in: Larkin M. Anthrax vaccine is safe and effective—but needs some improvement, says IOM.
Lancet. 2002;359:951.
16.
Howe EG. Medical ethics: Are they different for the military physician? Mil Med. 1981;146:837–841.
17.
Howe EG. Ethical issues regarding mixed agency of military physicians. Soc Sci Med. 1986;23:803–813.
18.
Marino MT. Use of surrogate markers for drugs of military importance. Mil Med. 1998;163(11):743–746.
19.
Henderson DA, Inglesby TV, Bartlett JG, et al. Smallpox as a biological weapon: Medical and public health
management. Working Group on Civilian Biodefense. JAMA. 1999;281(22):2127–2137.
20.
Mayers DL. Exotic virus infections of military significance: Hemorrhagic fever viruses and pox virus infections. Dermatol Clin. 1999;17(1):29–40.
21.
Haim M, Gdalevich M, Mimouni D, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Adverse reactions to smallpox vaccine: The Israeli
Defence Force experience, 1991 to 1996. A comparison with previous surveys. Mil Med. 2000;165(4):287–289.
22.
Carter BS. Ethical concerns for physicians deployed to Operation Desert Storm. Mil Med. 1994;159(1):55–59.
23.
Longmire AW, Deshmukh N. The medical care of Iraqi enemy prisoners of war. Mil Med. 1991;156(12):645–648.
24.
McDonald R, Cao T, Borschel R. Multiplexing for the detection of multiple biowarfare agents shows promise in
the field. Mil Med. 2001;166(3):237–239.
A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine
865
25.
Wiener SL. Strategies for the prevention of a successful biological warfare aerosol attack. Mil Med.
1996;161(5):251–256.
26.
Policy concerning homosexuality in the armed forces. General Military Law, Armed Forces, 10 USC Sect 654
(2000).
27.
The Secretary of Defense. Policy on Identification, Surveillance and Disposition of Military Personnel Affected With
HTLV-III. Memorandum, 24 October 1985.
28.
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1987. Pub L 99-661, Division A, Title 7, 705c(1986). Codified
in 10 USC 1074.
29.
Maze R. Hill, services debate [adverse actions] after confidential interviews. Navy Times. 29 June 1987:3.
30.
Howe EG. Ethical aspects of military physicians treating patients with HIV/Part one: The duty to warn. Mil
Med. 1988;153:7–11.
31.
National Museum of Health and Medicine. Exhibits. Available at: http://www.natmedmuse.afip.org/exhibits/dna/identification/identification.html. Accessed 23 May 2002.
32.
Holland MM, et al. Mitochondrial DNA sequence analysis of human skeletal remains: Identification of remains
from the Vietnam War. J Forensic Sci. 1993;38(3):542–553.
33.
Repository History. Available at: http://www.afip.org/Departments/oafme/dna/history.htm. Accessed 23 May
2002.
34.
US Department of Defense. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP). Washington, DC: DoD; 28 October 1996.
DoD Directive 5124. 24.
35.
Request for Specimen Destruction. Available at: http://www.afip.org/Departments/oafme/dna/
EarlyDest.htm. Accessed 1 March 2002.
36.
DNA Samples. Available at: http://www.uscg.mil/hq/mcpocg/1medical/rcdna01.htm. Accessed 1 March 2002.
37.
US Department of Defense. Policy for Implementing Instructions for Early Destruction of Individual Remains Identification Reference Specimen Samples. DoD Policy Memorandum, 4 November 1996.
38.
Mayfield v Dalton, 901 F. Supp 300, 303 (D. Hawaii 1995).
39.
Wakin MM. Wanted: Moral virtues in the military. Hastings Cent Rep. 1985;15(5):25–26.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 2
866
