23
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
Chapter 2
THEORIES OF MEDICAL ETHICS: THE
PHILOSOPHICAL STRUCTURE
DAVID C. THOMASMA, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
A Definition of Medical Ethics
An Analysis of Ethical Judgments
ROOTS OF ETHICS: ANCIENT FORCES
THE TREE TRUNK: TRADITIONAL ETHICAL THEORIES
Teleology and Utilitarianism
Deontology
Virtue Theory
Summary of the Traditional Ethical Theories
BRANCHES OF MEDICAL ETHICS: DIFFERING PERSPECTIVES
Public Policy Medical Ethics
Applied Medical Ethics
Clinical Ethics
The Intertwining Branches of Medical Ethics
PUBLIC POLICY MEDICAL ETHICS THEORIES
Institutional Policies
Regulations
Legislation
APPLIED MEDICAL ETHICS THEORIES
Principlism
Alternatives to Principlism
CLINICAL ETHICS THEORIES
Methodological Clinical Ethics Theories
Methodological Schemas: Clinical Ethics Workups
CONCLUSION
*Professor and English Chair of Medical Ethics, Neiswanger Institute of Bioethics and Health Policy, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola
University Chicago, 2160 South First Avenue, Maywood, Illinois 60153; formerly, Director, Medical Humanities Program, Loyola University Chicago Medical Center. (Dr. Thomasma died 25 April 2002)
24
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Applied
Ethics
Benefience-in-Trust
Four-Principle Approach
Normative Ethics
Libertarianism
Communitarianism
Principlism
Narrative
Feminist
Alternatives
to Principlism
Institutional Policies
Regulations
Legislation
Theories
Clinical Ethics
Clinical Ethics Rules
Casuistry
Unitary Theory
Moral Pluralism
Workup Guide
Mediation
Grids
Schemas
DEONTOLOGY
VIRTUE
TELEOLOGY
PHILOSOPHY
RELIGION
SCIENCE
CULTURE
Public Policy
Ethics
The “ethics tree,” as shown in this frontispiece, is provided to illustrate the philosophical theories that will be presented in
this chapter. The intermingling of religion, science, culture, and philosophy through the many centuries formed the “roots”
of medical ethics—the traditions, virtues, and rules that support the moral life. From these roots came the “trunk”—the
theories derived from efforts to explain and justify decisions about the moral life. The three traditional theories that
comprise the trunk are teleology (which stresses the consequences of what we do), deontology (which emphasizes the
importance of duties and obligations), and virtue theory (which discusses the merits of virtue and its importance in living
the good life). The trunk, in turn, supports the three major branches of medical ethics, which deal with the moral problems
brought about by medicine in the modern world. These three major branches of medical ethics are public policy medical
ethics (which must address issues of a broad societal nature), applied medical ethics (which discusses applying
medical ethics to the plethora of medical conundrums faced by practitioners), and clinical ethics (which brings all of this
into focus by the bedside of the patient). Thus, this tree, with its roots, trunk, and branches, not only demonstrates the
relationship between the various theories but also vividly shows the rapid growth of theories more recently, as evidenced
in the many smaller branches filling out the tree’s top.
25
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
INTRODUCTION
Having looked at the moral foundations of the
patient–physician relationship in the previous chapter, it is now time to discuss how medical ethics can
be viewed from many different perspectives and
categories. Its roots lie in the ancient professional
commitments and codes of medicine. Its branches
grew with each succeeding age as new challenges
confronted these commitments. Shoots on these
branches developed as medical science and practice began to challenge the accepted philosophical,
religious, and cultural assumptions of the day
(Chapter Frontispiece). For the most part this
growth of medical ethics was regular and controlled. Since World War II, however, medical ethics has proliferated and, some would say, even blossomed out of control.
A reason for this is that enormous technological
advances have occurred that both threaten and challenge every aspect of human personal and social
life, including the ancient commitments of medicine to the value of the human person and the sanctity of human life. 1 As technology in medicine expanded between World War I and World War II,
ethical problems arose that threatened the traditional Hippocratic synthesis developed over centuries. There appeared “strangers at the bedside,”
new agents that entered into the patient–physician
relationship. 2 Many physicians, patients, or surrogates had to turn to ethicists, lawyers, court decisions, legislation, or other forms of clarification for
articulating the extent and limits of their duties.
Other physicians despaired of ever finding an ethical
resolution. Often one hears the phrases, “there can
be no solution to ethical dilemmas,” or “there is no
right or wrong in such cases.”
Just because the moral analysis required by some
of the most pressing dilemmas is difficult, however,
does not mean that there is no possibility of resolution. The biggest danger is to reduce moral analysis
to personal opinion, or emotional, personal stories.
Then, dilemmas that require the highest faculties
would be reduced to rhetoric. Ethics is a legitimate
discipline that parallels medicine itself. It is both
an art and a “science.”3 It offers a systematic and
relatively objective way to approach ethical dilemmas. This appeals to health professional educators,
who have developed medical ethics programs over
the past 30 years. These programs are still being
perfected.
This chapter explores some of the many developments in modern medical ethics. First the meaning of medical ethics will be examined by defining
it and looking at how ethical judgments are made.
Under that same heading of the meaning of medical ethics, the different levels of medical ethics discussion will be briefly reviewed, as well as how
these levels are all interrelated. This point stresses
that, despite the distinctions drawn in this chapter,
in practice most people tend to employ a variety of
tools from different theories in their effort to solve
problems and to propose ethical public policy.
The reason for organizing the chapter this way
is that there are many theories of medical ethics,
just as there are many kinds of medical ethics practices. Among the traditional theories that have predominated in the course of medical ethics, two
stand out. The first is utilitarian theory and the second is deontological theory. The first theory analyzes issues in terms of consequences that produce
a net of benefit over harms, and the second theory
analyzes issues in terms of duties and rights. The
first theory has always been exceptional for determining the common good when individual rights,
duties, or responsibilities conflict with others, equally
well-taken. The second theory, deontology, is excellent for underlining individual responsibility.
After 30 years of success in bioethics, given the
abstracting tendencies of both of these traditional
theories, a search for alternative theories has arisen.
These theories either represent traditional and
sometimes ancient approaches to ethics, such as
virtue theory, casuistry, or communitarian ethics,
or they are more recent efforts to remain true to the
concrete and complex arena of human affairs in
which medical ethics dilemmas occur. Examples of
the latter are feminist ethics, caring ethics, and narrative ethics. These will all be explained later. To
complicate matters further, interdisciplinary, international, and intercultural ethics are now being
proposed, introducing the perspective of multiculturalism to balance the overemphasis on American value systems, particularly the individualism
that influences so much of secular bioethics today. 4
By dividing the chapter into traditional ethical
theories, and then the branches of medical ethics—
public policy medical ethics, applied medical ethics,
and clinical ethics—some sorting order is presented
among the competing models of doing ethics. In each
category I will present first the major viewpoints
of a theory or model of medical ethics. Then each
will be assessed according to its strengths and weaknesses. A unique feature of the chapter is a thor26
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
ough discussion of the newer field of clinical ethics, which represents a radical break with more traditional modes of ethics analysis, and one more
clearly related to the practical reasoning found in
medical clinical judgments. (Clinical ethics will be
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3, Clinical
Ethics: The Art of Medicine.) This last section, therefore, includes ethics workups and methodological
paradigms for clinical ethics analysis.
Throughout, it will help the reader to distinguish
different realms of ethics. In each of the above-mentioned domains of ethical theories and models, there
are discussions in the literature at the realm of fundamental principles, the realm of axioms (interpretations of principles), and the realm of moral rules
(ways to interpret conflicts of values, principles, and
axioms). A good example of these realms comes
from the injunction against lying. “Lying is wrong,”
is a principle. An axiom might be, “It is not wrong
to withhold the truth from those who do not deserve it”—say a Nazi storm trooper who demands
to know if you are harboring Jewish patients in your
hospital. 5(pp7–20) An example of a rule would be, “Lying may be morally justifiable to save a life or to
avoid harming a person.” Figure 2-1 illustrates these
three realms in medicine.
It is easy to become confused about these conflicts unless one recalls that all ethical dilemmas
involve a clash of cherished values embodied in
long-held principles. For any person in a dilemma
it is difficult to prioritize these cherished values,
for example, telling the truth and saving lives, because they both seem to be highly prized and sometimes irreconcilable. Finding the right balance
among these and other values is the heart of the
moral life.
What is medical ethics? Medical ethics is a broad
term that encapsulates efforts in public and private
discourse to act with probity. Although key terms
in medical ethics are often used without the precision of the sciences, it is useful to spell out their
general meaning, beginning with a definition of
medical ethics.
A Definition of Medical Ethics
Before examining different types of medical ethics, one should consider briefly what ethics itself
might be. Ethics encompasses both the study and
the practice of moral choices and moral values, and
the judgments behind those choices. Thus ethics
discussion is required by every discipline and is
essential to every human enterprise, from education
to marriage, from business to dying, from choosing
to have children to providing for their upbringing.
This wide range is mandated by the fact that all
choices involve values, some of which are moral.
This means that they are subject to an analysis of
the good ends of human life.
Additionally, discussion of those ends—the goals
of value choices—encompasses passionate discourse about the need to be moral and about what
is a desirable goal: happiness, or simply social survival, or perhaps the maintenance of individual
freedom. Such discussion of the higher or “meta”
questions entails what one university president calls
“civic republican thinking.”6 By this he means
the obligation to participate in society in a meaningful and contributory way, because such ethical
reflection is so badly needed in public life. In medical ethics these issues involve more concrete problems such as the goals of healthcare, critical
self-reflection about one’s actions, and the development of autonomous decision making on the part
of patients, physicians, and others in the healthcare
system.
Fig. 2-1. Comparison of principles, axioms, and rules. Principles, axioms, and rules operate on different levels of
abstraction in ethics. This schematic shows how these function in the specific field of biomedical ethics and patient care.
Principles
Axioms
Rules (Interpreting Conflicts)
Respect for persons
Respecting autonomy is the best way
to respect persons
Preserve life
Acting in the best interests of patients
is the best way to preserve their lives
Relieve suffering
The best way to control suffering is to
relieve pain
Good must be done, evil avoided
Act to increase the level of good and
reduce evil in society
}}
}
Patient wishes trump all other considerations
Double-effect
Compassionate care
27
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
Another feature of ethics is that its moral analysis can be free of faith-commitments, although individual faiths have contributed greatly to a secular medical ethics. 7 For example, the Park Ridge
Center in Chicago was established through Project
Ten—a study of 10 fundamental concepts in medicine from the point of view of 10 different faith traditions. These were introduced in a study in which
Engelhardt8 argued that philosophy, not theology,
is the queen of the sciences in a secular, pluralistic
world. Although it has roots in religious medical ethics, modern bioethics has grown into a very sophisticated secular discipline. 7 It is becoming increasingly
international. 9 This freedom from faith commitments
suits the moral and religious pluralism of modern
culture throughout the world. (See Kleinman10 for a
further discussion of cultural relativism.)
The focus of medical ethics is on making judgments in difficult cases, either those involving individuals and families or those that require social
and legal policy, which requires an analysis of ethical judgments. What are they?
An Analysis of Ethical Judgments
Graber11 distinguishes three kinds of ethical judgments: (1) evaluative judgment, (2) judgments of
duty or moral obligation, and (3) judgments of character or moral evaluation. Evaluative judgment is
concerned with what is worthwhile or valuable to
do. People make such value judgments many times
during a day, from deciding to buy one type of car
over another, to a statement that a career in healthcare
is important because it assists people. Refining values such as these that shape life’s goals and activities
are an essential function of living an “examined
life,” as Socrates urged.
Judgments of moral obligation concern the action to be done or avoided when making an ethical
choice and are somewhat independent of evaluative
judgments. Rights and entitlements are contained in
these moral judgments, as are responsibilities to others and to society. “I must remove the ventilator
because the patient made it clear in her advance
directive she did not want to be maintained on one,”
is such a judgment of moral obligation. Another example might be the axiom one often hears in medicine, “The patient comes first,” meaning that in any
conflict of duties, the health professional must put the
good of the patient before one’s own self-interest. 12
The double-effect moral rule is another example
of a judgment of moral obligation. This rule determines how to act when two or more effects are anticipated, at least one of which is perceived as evil.
In medicine this double-effect rule is used to increase pain control at the end of life (the good effect) even though it may contribute to the patient’s
death (the evil effect). Much of modern medical ethics has been centered around such judgments of
moral obligation, particularly with respect to patient rights.
The third type of ethical judgment concerns the
character of the moral agent or agents, and expresses praise or blame. “It was evil of the Nazis to
exterminate 9 million people,” is a very good example. Another would be, “This young nurse is an
outstanding caregiver because she is so compassionate.” Although not enough attention in the past century has been paid to this type of ethics, it has always
been part of the way society, institutions, and the professions themselves have shaped the kind of persons
individuals should become, from good citizens, good
churchgoers, and good civil servants, to good physicians, lawyers, teachers, nurses, and the like.
All three types of ethical judgment are involved
in moral analysis. They are complementary, but can
function independently of each other, just as the
three major ethical theories can. These will be examined next. Nonetheless they work best in a thorough analysis by being considered in conjunction
with one another. Thus ethical analysis combines
attention to the judgment of actions (roughly teleology), duties (deontology), and moral character
(virtue theory).
ROOTS OF ETHICS: ANCIENT FORCES
Every society has traditions, virtues, and rules
that support the moral life. At the point of development that permits philosophical rather than
mythological reflection, there are usually four
sources that feed into an ethical theory: (1) religion,
(2) science, (3) culture, and (4) philosophy.
1.
Religion: Religion is the social glue that
kept original cultures together. It provided
the guidelines and instructions for conduct
along with stories and myths that exemplified good modeling behavior. In secular society it is often used to describe good
behavior as saintly, or to condemn bad behavior as sinful.
2.
Science: As development increased, science
and technology grew, usually challenging
traditional behaviors and requiring reflec28
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
tion about them. Today science provides
both new knowledge and corresponding
challenges. This process requires continuous
cultural adaptation among the other forces.
3.
Culture: From the point of view of ethics,
culture is the residue of past experience, a
rich and vital source of do’s and don’ts that
arose in response to various challenges
one’s people faced.
4.
Philosophy: Philosophy is a more abstract,
disciplined examination of situations, experiences, presumptions, prohibitions, and
virtuous conduct in the other major sources
of ethics. Philosophy then contributes to a
more generalized level or “theory” of
moral conduct beyond one’s religious and
cultural context.
The results of the intermingling of these four
sources can be called the tree trunk of ethics.
THE TREE TRUNK: TRADITIONAL ETHICAL THEORIES
All ethics theories derive from efforts to explain
and justify moral decisions. These decisions in turn
require artful examination of different kinds of ethical judgments. In addition, all ethical theories share
a broad perspective on objective morality, generating principles, axioms, and rules and providing direction to the question: Why be moral? There are
three major theories in the tree trunk of ethics and,
thus, in bioethics, that help answer this question.
Teleology and Utilitarianism
Teleological theories stress the consequences of
actions as the first step in analyzing moral activity.
Consequentialism is another name given to this
class of theories. Teleology comes from the Greek
for goal (telos) and theory (logos). Such theories argue that when the moral outcome of an action is
unclear one must choose that action or those actions
that provide the best predictability for a good outcome. This is known as act utilitarianism. An alternative approach is rule utilitarianism in which the
action must conform to a rule chosen to provide the
best predictability for a good outcome. One makes
a choice for the most good and for the least amount
of harm.
Utilitarianism is most often classed as a consequentialist theory because it proposes that in conflicts, one is ethical if one chooses to maximize the
good, and minimize the harm: “The greatest good
for the greatest number,” is the primary ethical principle of this theory. Mill is the ethicist most identified with utilitarian theory,13 although it was first
advanced by Bentham as an economic and social
policy principle. 14–16
Strengths
The strengths of utilitarian and consequentialist
theory in general are that the theory is outstanding
for resolving disputes between individuals and
groups in society. It aims also at public discussion
and even measurement of outcomes. With respect
to medicine and healthcare delivery, both of which
are also focused on visible or public effects of interventions, utilitarianism especially is appealing.
It also most often helps resolve conflicts between
individual and public duties of professionals. Unlike deontological theory (to be discussed next),
which has no explicit provision for resolving disagreements, utilitarianism is almost a required
theory of industrialized and technological societies, as well as political activity itself.
Weaknesses
Teleological theory has been criticized often for
the fact that one cannot predict the outcome of actions in advance; thus it is impossible to set the standards of one’s moral action on the basis of the act
itself. Rather, deontologists argue that the ultimate
standard must be one’s internal duty. This leads to
the primary supposed weakness of utility as a measure of the good. Usefulness to society is not a good
criterion for moral probity, because what society
finds desirable may often turn out to be evil. For
example, the Nazis argued that eugenics was necessary to save the Nordic race (the greatest good
for the greatest number), and instituted many programs to sterilize the retarded, and enhance desired
characteristics through sperm donation from SS
(Schutzstaffel—the “protection echelon”) storm
troopers in the Mutter und Kind (Mother and Child)
program.
Individual rights and individual conscience can
be victims of utilitarian-like thinking. Response to
criticism of this sort led to the distinction between
act utilitarianism and rule utilitarianism, and to efforts to develop objective standards of the good that
would transcend individuals and particular societies.
29
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
Ethical theories, such as utilitarianism, tend to
be abstract, often with subtle nuances. Case studies, which are used frequently in medicine, are especially appropriate in discussing medical ethics
theories as these cases concern real people in the
“here and now.” The following case study in truth
telling will be revisited several times throughout
the chapter to demonstrate the different medical
ethical theories.
Case Study: Truth Telling
A 71-year-old widow is dying of end-stage breast cancer. While the cancer has metastasized to her bones and
brain, she is still able to converse reasonably well. Her
husband died 8 years ago. She has had to face this cancer and its relapse virtually on her own. Her two sisters
died before her husband, one from the same disease that
is ending her life. Her one source of comfort has been
her only child, a computer specialist, who took a leave
from his work for 6 months to be with his mother during
this final episode of her life.
As the patient slips in and out of consciousness, and
her pain control medications increase, she asks for her
son, Mark. “Why isn’t he here? Is Mark all right?” she
asks. Yesterday her physician and the nursing staff were
informed that Mark died in the patient’s home, an apparent suicide. He had become despondent over his mother’s
impending death. According to the note he left, he wanted
to “be there” with his aunts and father before his mother
arrived.
Should the healthcare providers tell the patient about
her son’s death?
Utilitarian Case Analysis
How might a utilitarian analyze the truth-telling case? In a calculus of benefits and harms, a utilitarian may argue that the harm to society of dissimulation outweighs any harm to the patient
caused by answering the patient’s questions truthfully. Dissimulation would help reinforce a common
bad habit of physicians who always want to “hold
out hope” for their patients. By contrast, another
utilitarian might argue the exact opposite by examining how the truth may cause more harm to this
patient and, by extrapolation, to all patients, and
therefore to society at large, than avoiding answering her questions. A rule utilitarian may appeal to
the importance of truth telling as a general guide
in this analysis, but note that this rule would be
trumped by other family and professional considerations. Note that different opinions will emerge
from within the same general theory. Deontology
is the name of the second theory.
Deontology
Deontological theory underlines the importance
of one’s duties and obligations. Deon is a Greek
word for duty. This theory was advanced by Kant,
in part to correct for perceived excessive teleological thinking that sought rewards outside the self for
being moral. The most obvious reward for “virtue”
was to “go to heaven.” Kant found this objectionable because such thinking did not focus on the
personhood in moral discourse, but rather and almost exclusively on actions and their rewards and
punishment. Further, Kant wanted to preserve ethics in an age of rising science by establishing more
objective standards for moral conduct, independent
of consequences. In effect he wanted ethics to be
more scientific and rational.
The centerpiece of deontological theory is the
notion of personhood. Kant elevated that notion to
moral supremacy, arguing that a person was a human being who constructed his or her own moral
law. This is the meaning of “autonomy,” from the
Greek for auto (self) and nomos (law or rule). Ideally a person acted morally for no “reason” at all,
but rather because he is required to act this way as
a person. The answer to a child who is rebuked
about lying: “But why is lying wrong?” should not
be to focus on the consequences of lying—more lies
to cover it up, eventual discovery, and so on—but
that lying is wrong in itself. A moral person cannot
lie because his personhood or integrity as a moral
agent would be compromised.
This focus on the person is what led Kant to propose that it is absolutely and always wrong to treat
persons “merely as means and not at the same time
as an end in themselves.”17(p47) If a person is treated
as an end in himself, there is a requirement to respect that person’s values. Nothing can be imposed
on others against their will, or without their consent. Indeed, Kant would urge that all persons have
an obligation to help others accomplish their goals
as part of this respect.
Strengths
Deontology helps avoid the rationalizations and
delusions to which all human beings are prone,
which help justify one’s personal actions and try to
convince everyone, including oneself, that they are
right. It corrects for “inauthentic” reasons for being moral, reasons such as that one might be found
out, or the action would not be good for one’s
resumé, or might result in public shame. Profes30
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
sional ethics especially originates with this conception of duty and obligation arising from the moral
center of the enterprise itself, and not solely from
public expectations. 3
An important strength, too, is the effort Kant
made to preserve ethics as a discipline, with objective referents, in a scientific age. Because Kant’s
philosophy was idealistic, he could not claim objectivity in nature, the way earlier natural law
theory did, which rested on what was called the
objective moral law. (Natural law theory is a
notion that inbuilt in human existence itself, in nature, is a “law” that impels people to do what is
good as they perceive it. Our founding fathers often referred, somewhat solemnly, to “Nature and
Nature’s God...” The pinnacle of referring to the
natural law in human affairs was the founding fathers’ commitment to “self-evident truths.” Among
them are: We are created; We are equal; We have
inalienable rights; and, We are created, in our natures, with desires for life, liberty, and happiness.)
Instead, Kant focused on two other objectivities, if
they could be so called. First, the act of the person
should always conform to the golden rule. Kant17
expressed it this way: Act always as if what you do
would become a universal law. This is called the
categorical (or absolute) imperative. Its use is an
excellent way to check any contemplated action, or
resolution of a case. Would one want this resolution to apply in every instance? This is called universalizing one’s conduct.
A second objectivity in Kant’s ethics is found in
certain “side constraints,” or conditions, that can
never be overridden for any reason whatsoever.
Such serious moral principles might include the
injunction against killing an innocent person,
against lying, or against harming an innocent person. Thus, for a deontologist, such side constraints
restrict individual liberty to calculate the greatest
good or even to modify moral principles to suit
one’s own self-interest. Fried notes how this differs
from utilitarian analysis: “It is part of the idea that
lying or murder are wrong, not just bad, that these
are things you must not do—no matter what. They
are not mere negatives that enter into a calculus to
be outweighed by the good you might do or the
greater harm you might avoid.”18(pp9–10)
Weaknesses
Deonotology cannot within itself provide for
resolution of conflicts among two or more moral
persons who profoundly disagree. Of course, they
may peaceably dialogue, but if they both must act
on principle to be ethical, compromise from those
principles will, by itself, void the duty-based ethic
and become one of utility (that is, assuming there
is no middle ground). In the truth-telling case, the
utilitarian effort to do the right thing may place
truth telling secondary to not distressing the patient
and therefore an outright lie could be morally
justified. By contrast the deontologist has an
exceptionless duty to tell the truth; even if it may
be delayed for a time, the intent must be truth telling. One could never justify lying to the patient for
any reason. The two ethical analyses seem to permit no middle ground.
The same problem holds true for the principles
themselves—recall the conflict between lying and
harming in the case example. Most of life is involved
with such compromises or the interpretation of the
priority of some principle, axiom, or rule over another in a certain instance. This prioritizing of principles leads to current biomedical efforts to apply
theories to practice and, also, to theories about such
application explored below.
Because of this conflict-resolution weakness,
deontological theory buttresses individual moral
action, and utilitarian theory tends to buttress social and public policy ethics. Yet the individual and
society are intimately linked. Kant17 himself had to
appeal to the continued existence of the community to argue that lying was always wrong, and
Mill19 also developed strong individual conceptions
of freedom in his essay, On Liberty, which is a different work than his utilitarian essays.
A major way to resolve conflicts among duties,
principles, obligations, axioms, and rules is to argue against deontology that there are no absolute
moral principles (a position of virtue theory). Ethics is then seen as a different kind of “science” than
the physical sciences Kant sought to emulate. Another resolution is offered by Ross, and developed
by the four-principle approach discussed below.
Ross proposed that such serious moral principles
would be considered prima facie (“at first sight” or
“at first blush”) obligations. That is to say, they
would be taken at face value, other things being
equal. They could only be overridden by another
serious moral principle, and not just self-interest
or inconvenience. Ross proposed seven prima
facie duties. 20(pp20–21) Others have proposed more or
fewer. 21,22(pp327–330) This attempt has the benefit of
preserving the deontological objection to utilitarianism, and of establishing objective principles for
agreement, but may still suffer from the weakness
31
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
of neglecting the moral virtue of the agent himself.
The person must make the decision about the seriousness of the situation and then judge which principle will take precedence.
Deontological Case Analysis
Using the truth-telling case, a deontologist would
argue from principle that it is always wrong to lie
because it also destroys the truths essential for social life. At best, a deontologist might argue that
some delay (while intending to tell the truth) might
be possible, for example promising the patient that
one would “try to find out more” about why her
son, Mark, does not come to see her anymore.
Is there any other way out of this conundrum?
Remember that the utilitarian would weigh the
harm to society against the harm to the patient, and
would come down on the side of society, even if it
harmed the patient. The deontologist would maintain that the patient would ultimately have to be
told, although that moment of truth could perhaps
be delayed somewhat. How does virtue theory
tackle this issue?
Virtue Theory
Virtue practices go as far back as the earliest moral
shaping of a child by parents and a community. Virtue theories can be traced to Socrates, who, through
Plato’s eyes, discussed the merits of virtue and its
importance in living a good human life. Aristotle
found the discussion of the virtues in Plato inadequate, largely because they were compared in humans to norms in the realm of ideas. Instead, Aristotle
formulated virtue theory in his ethics as a branch of
politics, or the study of the larger virtues of public
life. Rather than in ideas, the virtues were to be
grounded in both human psychology (the potentialities, proclivities, personalities, and emotions of persons) and in human affairs (the real relations of
persons to one another in friendship and community).
Thus, the virtues are habits formed by one’s personality, parental and social training, and professional or other standards suitable to one’s life
choices and roles in society. A timid child, left untrained in courage, might do fine as a cautious loan
officer, but would make a poor captain in the military. If the same child was encouraged to stand up
for himself and his principles by his parents and
their church, then that child may develop a virtue
or habit of acting in a courageous way. This would
be a result of basic personality (timidity) and hard
work to overcome it (courage). Now as an adult,
this individual may, indeed, exhibit courage as a
loan officer or even as a captain.
Further, every social group has a different measure
of the balance of virtue in the socially complex mix of
personal and community shaping. In one society, eating moderately is a virtue (for instance, today’s society urging everyone to stay in shape), whereas another might stress the pleasures of sampling foods
to the point of illness or compulsion (the Roman
vomitorium is a good example). In sports a player is
urged to “play through the pain,” a sign of courage,
whereas in everyday life a regular patient with the
same injury would be counseled to stay in bed. It
would be imprudent to keep going. Both examples,
of temperance and of courage, are helpful because
they show how the body itself provides some guidance for establishing a mean between extremes in any
culture—illness that will occur due to over- or
undereating, or damage to the body (arthritis in the
knee) if one ignores the pain signals too much.
For many centuries virtue theory was largely
identified with an Aristotelian view of human nature and human social life. Later, during and after
the Enlightenment (when rational thought was
emphasized), virtue theory was also grounded in
ideas of instinct, common sense, and gentlemanliness. In essence, virtue theory argues that all human beings have an inborn nature that tends to the
good in moral actions, but needs molding and direction, and most especially repeated habitual action, to refine that nature away from vices and unbalanced or inordinate behavior. Virtues, in fact, are
defined as good operative habits that intensify the
potentialities of human nature from its emotions to
its intellect and will toward good actions.
Clearly anyone who grew up in a strong community will have been shaped this way, trained by
parents and the community, secular and religious,
about what sort of person one should be. Some
strong communities raise persons considered reprehensible by others. The Nazi storm troopers of the
World-War-II era and the Hezbollah in the contemporary Middle East are certainly recent examples.
Within their own social and political context, such
individuals are considered a type of patriot, a freedom fighter; to the rest of the world they are killers
and terrorists.
Morally strong communities stress different virtues; their language and arts are filled with stories
and pictures of moral virtues essential for a decent
human society: courage, love, friendship, responsibility, truth telling, faithfulness, and wisdom. 23
32
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
The point of these stories and artistic expression is
to emphasize the individual’s responsibility for
choosing the good in every situation. To guard
against a misdirected political system or a type of
Nazi physician, Pence argued “Certain core virtues
are always necessary for any decent society … physicians need additional virtues, such as humility (the
opposite of arrogance), compassion, and respect for
good science (integrity).”24(pp49–50) This theory of character of the physician was further developed by
others such as Pellegrino and this author. 25
Strengths
Surely the character of the agent is crucial to
medical ethics because the health professional is the
conduit for interpreting and applying whatever
theory is used. Virtue was the implicit and dominant theory in traditional medical ethics until recently. Virtue theory shares with deontological
theory the emphasis on the moral agent. It adds to
the moral goodness of the agent, assumed by Kant,17
a richer appreciation of element in moral failure,
and hence a requirement to analyze the motives of
the agent as well. However, it shares with teleological theory an analysis of the goodness of actions too,
because, as Aristotle and Aquinas both argued, all
agents act for an end. 26 This means that, independent
of a good motive, and a good human being, an action can be wrong in itself. Thus, virtue theorists
might argue that euthanasia, although performed
out of compassion, is morally wrong because it involves killing, itself an evil act. Alternatively, a virtue
theorist might argue that providing uncompensated
care for the poor is a good human act, even if done
for illicit motives such as personal pride, because
the act has a quality of goodness independent of
the agent.
Virtue theory thus can combine the strengths of
both of the other theories. Its basic principle was
articulated by Aquinas as, one should do good and
avoid evil. 27 Yet, this principle itself is derived from
a natural law theory. Thus the rich tradition of natural law theory, hotly disputed today, provided an
anchor for virtue theory in a universal human nature rather than in the realm of Plato’s Ideas or in
later abstract moral principles.
As peoples’ awareness became increasingly global, such inbuilt capacities have formed opinions
about international rights, the United Nations’
Charter, the United Nations’ Declaration of Human
Rights, and many subsequent condemnations of
“local” practices such as the use of organs taken
from condemned prisoners or purchased on the
world’s black markets. 9
An additional strength of virtue theory is its explicit grounding in the community. Individuals are
not perceived separate from their own community.
Further, virtue theory is less of an absolute certainty.
Moral boundaries are surrounded by haziness and
even sometimes darkness at the edges. There is
room for nonabsolute moral judgment that is generally, for the most part, true.
Weaknesses
It would be simplistic to argue that a return to
virtue could be a sole basis for medical ethics. This
might have been possible were moral pluralism and
relativism less a characteristic of Western society.
MacIntyre28 has shown brilliantly how irretrievable
is the metaphysical consensus in the modern world
that virtue theories require. The model of good conduct, and the search for and development of a “good
life,” require considerable public agreement and
reinforcement of conduct that is respectful (of others, of property), honest (probity of judges), and
dedicated (the compassionate physician). Virtue
ethics by itself does not provide sufficiently clear
action guides; it is too private and too prone to individual definitions of virtue or the virtuous person. At the same time, its unexamined public roots
may harbor social consensus about the good that
is, in fact, evil, as in the Nazi examples of loyalty to
one’s nation and race.
Virtue theory must be anchored in some prior
theory of the right and the good, and of human nature in terms of which the virtues can be defined. It
also requires a community of values to sustain its
practice. 29 The carrying out of these virtues not only
requires public consensus about right and good
conduct, it also demands a metaphysical agreement
about what counts as the good. This will require a
conceptual link with duties, rules, consequences,
and moral psychology, in which the virtue of prudence plays a special role. 30
Virtue Theory Case Analysis
Turning again to the truth-telling case in this
chapter, it becomes apparent that virtue theory
needs some guiding principles or standards. If two
physicians consider themselves virtuous exemplars
of modern medicine, both kind, courageous, and
compassionate, they may still disagree about the
relative importance of truth telling; one might think
that the need to comfort the patient and be charitable toward her would require backing off her
question about why her son no longer comes to see
her. The other may still adjudicate the importance
33
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
TABLE 2-1
TRADITIONAL ETHICAL THEORIES AND ASSOCIATED THEORISTS
Teleology
Deontology
Virtue
John Stuart Mill
Immanuel Kant
Aristotle
Goal
Happiness, goal of action.
A good will.
Happiness, all actions.
Premise
When moral outcome is
A person acts morally because
All human beings have an inborn
unclear, one must choose
he is required to as a person
nature that tends to be good in
action that provides best
(underlies the importance of
moral actions but needs molding
predictability for good
one’s duties and obligations).
and direction.
outcome.
Means
A calculus of pleasures
A good will is one that acts
The virtues reinforce natural
and values justifies
from duty.
tendencies toward happiness.
actions.
Meaning of
Happiness is pleasure
Acts are done from duty if
The good is happiness conceived as
the good
and the avoidance of
they are what reason requires.
meshing with the common good.
pain.
Norms
Act always to maximize
Categorical Imperative: Act
Actions should conform to the best
the benefit (good), which
always as if what you will do
human behavior as evidenced by
is pleasure. This is an
will become universal law.
scientific study of nature and
absolute norm. Act
Or, never treat persons merely
psychology. Norms apply only
always to maximize the
as means only but always as
generally and not absolutely.
sum of pleasure for all
ends in themselves. Norms
who will be affected by
are absolute.
one’s act (Principle of
Utility).
Strengths
Is outstanding for resolvHelps avoid the rationalizaCombines the strengths of
ing disputes between
tions to which all persons are
Teleology and Deontology; “do
individuals and groups.
prone; it corrects for
good” and “avoid evil”; is
“unauthentic” reasons for
explicitly grounded in the
being moral.
community.
Weaknesses
One cannot predict outCannot provide for resolution
Is simplistic; does not provide
comes in advance, thus
of conflicts among two or
sufficiently clear action guides;
it is impossible to set the
 more moral persons who
is too private, too prone to
standards of one’s moral
 profoundly disagree.
individual definitions.
action on the basis of the
act itself.
Adapted with permission from Thomasma DC, Marshall PA. Clinical Medical Ethics: Cases and Readings. New York: University Press
of America; 1995: 10.
of truth above compassion. Both, however, might
conduct a greater self-examination than is found in
other theories, especially asking what effects lies
make on their own lives and those of their family
and students, as well as other healthcare providers, who look to them as role models.
Summary of the Traditional Ethical Theories
Before leaving the discussion of the “tree trunk”
of medical ethics, it is helpful to briefly review the
three types of theories that form the trunk—teleological, deontological, and virtue. As already noted,
teleological theory stresses the consequences of
actions. While this approach is quite helpful for
resolving disputes between individuals and groups
in society, it fails to address the fact that one cannot predict the outcome of actions in advance.
Deontological theory underlines the importance of
one’s duties and obligations. It thus helps avoid
the rationalizations and delusions that people
might want to use to justify their actions, but it
cannot within itself provide for resolution of conflicts among two or more moral persons who pro34
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
foundly disagree. Virtue theory can be traced to
ancient philosophers, such as Socrates and Plato,
who discussed the merits of virtue—the habits
formed by one’s personality, parental and social
training, and professional or other standards suitable to one’s life choices and roles in society. Virtue
theory thus can combine the strengths of both of
the other theories. Its basic principle is “Do good,
and avoid evil.” However, virtue ethics by itself
does not provide sufficiently clear action guides; it
is too private and too prone to individual definitions of virtue or the virtuous person. A further
comparison of the three traditional theories is presented in Table 2-1.
BRANCHES OF MEDICAL ETHICS: DIFFERING PERSPECTIVES
Medical ethics, then, is a field of study about
moral problems created by the modern practice
of medicine. There are at least three distinct
branches of the field: public policy medical ethics
(macro level); applied medical ethics (meso level);
and clinical ethics (micro level) each of which
contribute to a holistic analysis of ethical issues. Overreliance on any one of them creates its own dangers. 31 They should be balanced with one another.
Public Policy Medical Ethics
Problems addressed in public policy ethics are
those that affect large groups and include the right
to healthcare for all citizens, different ideas about
being just and fair to persons, and establishing public limits on medical treatment. An example might
be what is called “age-based rationing,” that is, a
proposal to cut off high-technology medical treatment after people reach approximately 80 years of
age. Other problems for public policy are controlling medical research, ensuring drugs are made
available for severe illnesses such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), ensuring that
research is done on diseases that affect one gender
more than the other, and helping professions such
as medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and physical
therapy to establish their own professional codes
of behavior.
A good example of public policy medical ethics
is provided by arguments about competitive business models of healthcare delivery, such as health
maintenance organizations (HMOs). Do these models compromise acting in the best interests of patients (principle of beneficence); access to care and
research for those people not covered in the plan
(greater good); or acting for others rather than out
of self-interest (the virtue of altruism)?
Applied Medical Ethics
Under this heading are examined different articulations of applying ethical theory itself to moral
conundrums. The four-principle approach (discussed later) is a good and common example. Another approach (also discussed later) is libertarian
ethics. Others, as mentioned in the introduction,
provide alternatives to a principled approach by
stressing the importance of context, narrative, and
the perspective of caring. I will take up only a few
of these models of application in both the principlism and alternatives to principlism categories
that are examined next.
Issues in this applied medical ethics branch cover
arguments about the ethics of abortion, euthanasia,
treating the young rather than the old when there
is not enough medical care to go around, in vitro
fertilization (ie, starting human life in a test tube),
manipulating genes to bring about a better human
being or to remove the genes that cause diseases,
helping people conceive children, withdrawing lifesupport at the end of life, discussing whether food
and water given through tubes can also be withdrawn
so a person can die, and the limits of a person’s freedom to make decisions in a community.
Clinical Ethics
A third branch of medical ethics can be called
clinical ethics. This branch is actually part of medical decision making itself. On a case-by-case basis,
clinical ethics evaluates the morality of decisions
made by and with patients and their families about
care. The type of problems that arise in this branch
of medical ethics include: deciding to remove lifesustaining treatment from a loved one; making decisions for patients who are either too young or too
senile to make them themselves; responding to requests for active, direct euthanasia; or directing the
treatment of a very retarded newborn infant. The
range of decisions is from birth to death. 32
The Intertwining Branches of Medical Ethics
For the purposes of discussion, these three
branches have been separated, but in actuality they
work together. People with AIDS must be concerned
about public policy regarding medications available
35
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
and nondiscrimination (public policy medical ethics), they must participate in arguments about
whether or not physicians are obliged to treat them
(applied medical ethics), and decisions about their
care, including their dying, must be made with their
loved ones and physicians (clinical ethics). An elderly person must be concerned about society’s commitment to care for the aged (public policy medical
ethics), arguments about the use of ventilators for
elderly stroke victims who have other diseases (applied medical ethics), and making advance decisions about one’s care, such as a living will or a
decision about whether or not one wants to be resuscitated in the event of a heart attack after entering a nursing home (clinical ethics). In general, public policy medical ethics deals with statistical groups
of people, applied medical ethics with targeted issues, and clinical ethics with a specific patient.
PUBLIC POLICY MEDICAL ETHICS THEORIES
The division of bioethics into branches is my own
idea, not necessarily shared by others. I have developed this approach to allow individuals and
groups to understand the complexities of not just
the decisions themselves, but also of the underlying perspectives and categories that so forcefully
impact these decisions. Public policy medical ethics addresses a wide range of societal issues that
have been fueled in recent years by the rapidly
evolving fields of medicine, science, and politics.
When medicine could only offer minimal intervention in the march of disease, societies mainly had
to concern themselves with issues of protection, that
is, the prevention of disease spread. But with these
rapid new advances in areas that were scarcely understood only a few decades ago, public policy
medical ethics has had to take on the difficult issues of who gets what in an era of burgeoning scientific possibility but limited resources, whether
those limitations are caused by the availability of
the treatments themselves or payment for those
treatments. Public policy medical ethics also addresses issues of “ought” and “can.” What ought a
society do for its members? What can it realistically
undertake? Public policy medical ethics falls into
the following subsets or branches: institutional policies, regulations, and legislation.
Institutional Policies
These are the policies developed by health institutions regarding ethical issues. Good examples
might be whether or not to offer some reproductive services such as pregnancy enhancement (a
fertility clinic) or pregnancy termination (an abortion clinic). An organization, and I include health
insurance companies in this group of health institutions, might consider what its mission and philosophy might be toward accepting Medicaid patients, or perhaps taking a more active stance in
preventing teenage pregnancies or the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases. These organizations
would thus be weighing what their roles should be
in these societal issues against what their resources
would allow.
Regulations
Regulatory agencies such as Health and Human
Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), or national health services such as the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) direct their attention to ethical matters by instituting frameworks
in which these matters are addressed. They publish rules such as the guidelines for research on animals and human subjects, ethical considerations in
research on human embryos and fetal tissue, rules for
reporting adverse effects in genetic therapy research,
or proposed rules for allocating scarce resources
such as human livers for transplantation. Thus,
these various regulatory agencies bring order out
of the chaos generated by the rapid advances in
medicine.
Legislation
It is predominantly state legislatures and the US
Congress that regularly pass legislation that includes bioethical considerations. In the past, legislation regarding the treatment and reporting of persons with AIDS, the minimum number of days in
the hospital for giving birth, and required insurance
coverage of emergency room treatment were good
examples. Examples of needs that have recently
occupied Congress include the issue of a patient’s
bill of rights in health maintenance organizations
(HMOs) and the need for a national health plan that
would distribute healthcare more justly and fairly.
In the future it is easy to imagine that legislation
will be necessary to address what becomes of the
information explosion that will accompany the human genome project.
Thus public policy medical ethics provides a
broad overview of the ethical considerations that a
36
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
society must address in the allocation and delivery
of healthcare to its citizens. However, despite the
weight of these considerations, they are not the
main thrust of this chapter. Rather, this chapter will
focus on how ethical judgments are made by understanding the various defining philosophies that
shape and mold these ethical viewpoints. It is only
through an appreciation of the complexity of these
issues that one can come to better understand how
these oftentimes difficult decisions can be made as
justly as possible for a patient, the family, the
healthcare organization, and the greater society.
APPLIED MEDICAL ETHICS THEORIES
This discussion now turns to an analysis of applied medical ethics theories, and then to clinical
ethics theories. Applied medical ethics theories are
those that concern ways principles or general ethics can be helpful in situations or issues. I separate
these into two major categories: (1) principlism and
(2) alternatives to principlism.
Principlism
Key to all principlist views of applied ethics is a
recognition of the importance of acting on principle
in ethics. The idea of this group of medical ethics
models in applied ethics is the weighting of the principles when applied to practice. Each model differs
in the weight it assigns to one or another of the principles in applications to the real world situation.
The Four-Principle Approach
This branch of bioethics was developed by scholars such as Beauchamp and Childress, Veatch, and
Engelhardt during their association with Georgetown University, in Washington, DC. The model
underlines the principled approach of autonomy,
beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice, and is the
leading approach in what is now regularly called
“the Georgetown Mantra,” a phrase sardonically
suggested by Clouser and Gert. 33 They were critical of the lack of reflection often found in analyses
by those who apply the four-principle approach to
medical ethical issues, even though they recognized
how widespread the model had become.
The philosophers who began to examine medical ethics brought a variety of well-established
moral traditions to bear on their reflections, usually some variant of act- or rule-based teleology
or consequentialism. But one theory, Ross’ theory
of prima facie principles, had a particular appeal.
It soon became the dominant way of “doing
ethics.”20(p19) An early example of this approach
could be found in the Belmont Report, a study by
the President’s Commission for the Protection of
Human Subjects in Research. There, four principles
are used to examine the many complex issues in
human subject research and to mold the Guidelines
for Research that now characterize modern institutional review boards (IRBs). 34
In that report, autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice were balanced with the goods
that can be sought in biomedical research. Subsequently guidelines were established that protected
the subject’s autonomy (by requiring informed consent), beneficence (by disclosing risk/benefit, and
IRB review and monitoring), nonmal-eficence (by
using clinical safeguards and testing), and justice
(by protecting from unfair burdens of research).
As mentioned, this approach originally was
adapted from ethics to medical ethics by Beauchamp and Childress in their volume, Principles of
Biomedical Ethics. 35 Beauchamp and Childress recognized the difficulties of attaining agreement on
the most fundamental roots of ethics, on the nature
of the good, on the ultimate sources of morality, on
the limits and validity of moral knowledge, or even
on which theory should predominate. To bypass
these problems, they followed the direction taken
by Ross and opted for prima facie principles, that
is, principles that should always be respected unless some strong countervailing reason exists that
would justify overruling them.
Four principles in this prima facie category were
especially appropriate for medical ethics—autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice.
This set of principles had the advantage of compatibility with deontological and consequentialist theories, and even with some aspects of virtue theory.
It has been applied widely to the resolution of ethical dilemmas by medical ethicists, and especially
by health professionals.
Strengths. The four-principle approach has several strengths. First, it reduces some of the looseness and subjectivity that characterized so many
ethical debates. More objective standards now appear. Second, it provides fairly specific action
guides. And, third, it offers an orderly way to “work
up” an ethical problem in a way analogous to the
clinical workup of a diagnostic or therapeutic prob37
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
lem. This point will be examined in the chapter’s
final section on clinical ethics models.
In addition, two of the prima facie principles,
beneficence and nonmaleficence, are identical to the
Hippocratic obligations to act in the best interests
of the patient and to avoid doing harm. Finally, a
major strength of the four-principle approach is its
potential for cultural neutrality. This notion has
been further explored by Gillon. 36 To the four principles he adds a concern or analysis for the scope
of their application to individual cases or issues. A
more recent example can be found in Gillon’s enormous exploration of the role of the four-principle
approach in many contemporary issues, and in
other cultures and faith-traditions. 37
Weaknesses. The principle of autonomy directly
contradicts the traditional authoritarianism and
paternalism of the Hippocratic ethic, which gave
no place to patient participation in clinical decisions. Both autonomy and justice are unfamiliar and
even, in some sense, antithetical to beneficence and
nonmaleficence. This conflict gives rise to one of
the imputed weaknesses of the four-principle approach for medical ethics—its lack of grounding in
clinical realities. Paternalism is inherent. Autonomy
appears to be imported.
Modern physicians have had the greatest problems
with the principle of autonomy because it is often
interpreted as being in opposition to beneficence.
This is an erroneous interpretation as beneficence
and autonomy can be linked in medicine. 38,39 Physicians have belatedly come to accept the principle of
autonomy largely because it is central to informed
consent and consistent with the individualistic
emphasis on privacy and self-governance that had
set the initial metamorphosis of medical ethics into
motion. Many physicians and ethicists, however, are
still not fully convinced of the soundness of autonomy
as a primary principle for medical practices. 12
Many fear the absolutization of autonomy, which
may override good medical judgment or encourage
detachment on the part of the physician. As autonomy of the patient became the primary principle
of clinical interactions, patients were able to overturn physician beneficence in favor of their own
freedom. Patients can choose to die rather than
remain on a ventilator. This is a good thing. But
what of a heart surgeon who would like two more
weeks of therapy to discern the level of function before acceding to the patient’s demands to
stop treatment? Thus a measure of beneficence
could override autonomy at some point. As some
thinkers have noticed, a view of the patient as
individual and autonomous is fundamentally flawed
because all people are actually vulnerable social
beings immersed in a vast network of relationships.
Of the four principles, justice is the most remote
from traditional medical ethics. Despite its prominence in the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle,
justice received no specific attention in the Hippocratic ethic, which centered on the welfare of individual patients and not society. Historically, justice
entered medical ethics much later, usually in relationship with a physician’s forensic duties. More
recently, for example, physicians such as psychiatrists or infectious disease specialists, caring for
potentially dangerous patients, have had imposed
on them a duty based in justice to warn others close
to the patient, and even perhaps the community at
large (as exemplified by the Tarasoff case, which is
discussed in Chapter 3, Clinical Ethics: The Art of
Medicine, of this volume).
Contemporaneously, justice has entered medical
ethics more forcibly as disparities in the distribution of healthcare have become more apparent. The
possibility that physicians may become agents primarily of fiscal or social purpose rather than of the
patient increases daily. Acting as “gatekeeper” or
“rationer” poses a worrisome conflict of obligations
for many traditionally-minded clinicians. Nonetheless, Rawls’40 sophisticated contractarian theory of
justice and his lexical ordering of obligations and
principles relative to distributive justice have placed
justice squarely in the forefront of today’s medical
ethics. His is the best modern treatment of justice.
That justice is an intrinsic virtue of medicine still
requires more analysis than it has traditionally received, although current interest in the ethical and
rationing issues of managed care brings it squarely
into focus. 22,28,41
The authors of the four-principle approach were,
of course, well aware of the limitations of Ross’ system of prima facie obligations—that is, the difficulties in putting any set of abstract principles into
practice in particular cases and the difficulty of reducing conflicts between prima facie principles, or
within a single principle, without some hierarchical or lexical ordering of the principles. Ross’ rather
vague formula of taking the action that gives the
best balance of right over wrong really begs those
questions. Some standard by which to measure the
appropriateness of the balance one comes to in
making a decision using the four principles is still
needed.
To accommodate those shortcomings, Beauchamp and Childress35 proposed four requirements
38
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
that must be met to justify “infringements” of a
prima facie principle or obligation: (1) the moral
objective sought is realistic; (2) no morally preferable alternative is available; (3) the least infringement possible must be sought; and (4) the agent
must act to minimize the effects of infringement.
These bioethicists hope in this way to steer a course
between the absolutism of principles and the relativism of situation ethics. Their requirements are
helpful but do not eradicate the inherent limitations
of any set of prima facie principles that is not lexically ordered, or at least based on clinical realities
themselves.
The primary objection to the four-principle approach is a general critique of principlism itself as
a methodology. Principlism appears to some to be
too deductive. This criticism is based on a concern
that ethics in general, and medical ethics in particular, not become too abstract and formulaic, and instead concern itself with concrete features of the
moral life.
Serious criticism of the four-principle approach
was raised in the April 1990 issue of the Journal
of Medicine and Philosophy. In that issue, Baruch
Brody 42 called the four principles “mid-level” principles, meaning that they are, themselves, in need
of rational justification and of a firmer grounding
in one of the great moral traditions. Clouser and
Gert33 decried the lack of a unifying moral theory
that would tie the principles together and give them
the conceptual grounding they need. Were such a
theory available, of course, it would make the principles unnecessary. Holmes43 contended that philosophical ethics, itself, is of limited value. He called
for “moral wisdom” for which philosophy does not
prepare us. Gustafson44 argued that philosophy is
an insufficient tool for confronting the broad agenda
of biomedical ethics. He further noted that prophetic, narrative, and public policy elements must
be included in biomedical ethics, as these elements
are more suited than principles to resolution of key
ethical issues in healthcare.
In this vein, an early criticism of Beauchamp and
Childress was that they held opposite theories (utilitarianism and deontology, respectively), yet could
reach agreement on a fundamental approach, which
would seem to render ethical theory useless. Perhaps instead of seeing this as a damning critique, it
can be taken as a measure of success—especially if
their purpose was to apply the best of the theories
to medical ethics.
The truth-telling case can again provide an example. The four principles are all equally important for guiding the discussion and resolution of the
clinical dilemma of what to tell the patient. Suppose autonomy (her right to be informed in this
case) is weighted over beneficence (acting in her
interests to prevent her from additional suffering
on her deathbed). The infringement guidelines still
seem to be rather remote to the physician who has
accepted the woman as a patient. Greater attention
to the patient’s life story and value system, along
with greater awareness of the healing relationship,
is also needed to justify balancing one principle to
have greater moral weight over another in a particular case.
Normative Ethics
A second, related, approach to the four-principle
approach is what can be called a normative medical ethics. By this is meant a theory that develops
specific norms for medicine. 45 Many remedies,
therefore, are offered to replace, prioritize, complement, or supplement prima facie principles.
Some proposals have already been noted. For
example, Veatch,22 as part of a draft medical ethics
covenant, or social contract, spells out six principles:
(1) fidelity, (2) autonomy, (3) honesty, (4) respect for
life, (5) justice and equality, and (6) respect for persons. Veatch is more concerned with the contract
itself rather than the specific norms, as a theory of
obligation that would help justify the principles to
which all parties, physicians and patients, would
agree. The ground for the principles would rest on
the social contract.
Beauchamp and McCullough38 speak of principles
as “models” that specify goals in medicine. These
goals in turn are values from which one derives physician obligations and the virtues of the medical profession, and presumably, those of the patients as
well. They stress the differences between the autonomy model and the beneficence model. Both are
normative, but both lead to different primary principles and, therefore, different moral obligations.
Strengths. There is much to be said for a normative medical ethics. By appealing to norms one is
able to ethically justify one’s application of theories and principles to specific cases. The norms help
prioritize important values, such as healing, truth
telling, and compassion, that arise as important in
the case of the dying mother and her son, the suicide victim.
Weaknesses. Nonetheless norms must still find
justification for their own prioritization by appeal
to some external lexical rule that itself cannot be
found within the norms themselves. An external
lexical rule is a comparative assertion. A norm may
39
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
say, “I always must tell the truth.” When norms
conflict, one must appeal to an ordering principle
to rank them. In clinical ethics, one might rank
norms based on a primary duty not to harm the
patient. Truth telling would then be subordinate to
nonmaleficence.
There are some medical ethics theories that do
not accept grounding in the clinical realities of
medicine. Instead, the ordering principle of norms
could only be found in social consensus. Veatch’s
social contract theory, for example, requires an assumption that there is no inherent moral center
within the discipline of medicine itself. All its values are simply socially constructed by implicit or,
as he proposes, explicit contracts.
Libertarianism: Primacy of Autonomy
So far it has been shown that some normative theories might rank one principle above all others.
Engelhardt, for example, places autonomy in the first
order of priority,46 ahead of beneficence. 47 This is also
the position of Childress,48 who argues that in any
conflict, autonomy must trump all other values. It can
be expressed as a rule that autonomous actions cannot be overruled by other values or priorities. 49–51
More explicit debate about autonomy has been
furthered by proposing that the basis of all bioethics, of all ethics in fact, is respect for autonomy.
Engelhardt’s argument is that it is impossible to be
ethical if one ignores an individual’s autonomy. For
Engelhardt,46 autonomy is supreme in all decision
making. His thinking develops for medical ethics a
full-blown theory of the primacy of autonomy, derived from Nozick’s52 conception known as libertarianism.
Autonomy, in Engelhardt’s view, is the necessary
condition of possibility for doing ethics in a
postmodern age. He calls it a necessary “side constraint,” thus arguing for a deontological understanding of its importance. Because there can be
no agreement about the good in a pluralistic age
and no assumption about primary values when all
things are called into question, the only possible
way to proceed in bioethics is to respect each
individual’s autonomous thinking and behavior
and to reach consensus through dialogue and
resolution from this respectful vantage point.
Engelhardt’s53 later revision of his position does not
change this basic conception.
Strengths. The autonomy assumption deserves
a rich analysis because of its preponderance in
American bioethics. For the moment, examine what
a great burden the concept of autonomy has to carry
in Western bioethics tradition. It is shorthand for
a way of respecting persons. It carries with it a
connotation of being first among equal values
or principles. It is a requirement of all ethics. It
functions as a condition of possibility in postmodern ethical analysis. (Exhibit 2-1 explores the condition of possibility and postmodern philosophy
further.) It underscores the importance of the individual over the community. Because of these and
other meanings, autonomy has become overburdened in bioethics.
For the philosopher, autonomy almost always
stands for the individual’s self-determination. As
suggested above, such self-determination has acquired an almost “sanctified” quality in Western
secular society. The words “autonomy” and “selfdetermination” have an aura in both spoken and
written English that is hard to describe to persons
from other cultures that might use the same words.
The aura suggests the American revolution, the
sense of fair play, of “no taxation without representation,” of individual rights over and against the
state, of “don’t tread on me,” of Jeffersonian Democracy in which individuals are endowed with
inalienable rights, including the right to liberty.
Weaknesses. Such emphasis on autonomy tilts
all the analysis away from the realities of the clinical setting and real-world conflicts toward a kind
of idealism that tries to make concrete an abstraction that glorifies the individual in society to the
detriment of the community. 54 It is important to realize that a critique of the importance of autonomy
in bioethics is also, by its very nature, a critique of
bioethical methodology itself, especially if that
methodology proceeds deductively from the principle of autonomy. 5 In such a view, individual choice
legitimates all morally-controverted issues.
Absolutization of the patient’s autonomy, then,
is a subject of growing concern. Libertarian assumptions implied by this emphasis have led many thinkers to counter autonomy with the need for beneficence as well. 12,55 The implications of conflicts about
medical ethics and ethical theory for the active euthanasia discussion, to take one example, include
the libertarian push for active euthanasia that might
endanger the health professional’s values in caring
for the dying patient. This push may diminish the
moral quality of the relationship between physician
and patient. It clearly tends to place exclusive emphasis on the needs and wants of the individual
patient. A full-court press of autonomy leads to the
notion that persons should be able to buy poisons
off the shelf at the drug store without any requirement to consult with, or even be under the care of,
40
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
a physician. This “self-deliverance” is touted as an
ideal by some, such as Humphrey,56 in the right-todie movement. Similarly, other overemphases on
autonomy lead to a diminished role for physicians
who become, at best, servants of patient or consumer demands, and at worst, lackeys without a
voice in the healing relationship. 57
Like all assumptions about basic principles, the
emphasis on autonomy leads to the question of
what society ought to be. In light of the overburden on the concept of autonomy, it would be good
to ask what autonomy actually means for the patient with illness,58 and for the health professionals
themselves. 57 This leads to a further application
theory proposed by Pellegrino and Thomasma,
called “beneficence-in-trust.”
Beneficence-in-Trust
With the benefit of a much more developed psychology of decision making than was present at
the time of Kant, one can add to the view he held
that autonomy is an essential function of moral
personhood. Decision making includes many factors interrelated among themselves and with autonomy, some of which are the stresses and strains
of life, mental and physical well-being, and quality
of life. 59 A far richer tapestry of ethical considerations emerges from locating the need for respecting autonomy within the patient’s life plans and
projects. Individuals perceive and formulate their
goals in different ways, and prepare for adjustments
differently, too, should these become necessary. 60
These are all elements of a person’s values that
ought to be respected in the healthcare relationship.
According to this application theory, rather than
the primacy of autonomy in the patient–physician
relationship, the physician should hold “in trust”
the patient’s value system as far as possible. This
position is called “beneficence-in-trust.”12 Beneficence-in-trust means acting in the best interest of
individuals while keeping “in trust” their levels of
moral values. Thus, it may not be as important to
respect autonomy by respecting persons’ decisions
as it is to provide in a healing relationship the necessary conditions for individuals to develop their
own reintegrating techniques. Given how differently individuals exhibit autonomous behavior, it
is important to intertwine these actions and reactions to serious illness within the patient–physician
relationship. The therapeutic relationship itself occurs within many different contexts from primary
care to tertiary. 61
Beneficence-in-trust, then, proposes that the good
EXHIBIT 2-1
THE CONDITION OF POSSIBILITY AND POSTMODERN PHILOSOPHY
The “Condition of Possibility” is a formal cause of an entity, event, or human activity. For an entity, progenitors are conditions of possibility. For an event like a cure, conditions of possibility might include the action of
a chemotherapeutic agent, biochemical and cellular responses, and the personal and professional interaction
of doctors and patients. For a human activity like ethics, a condition of possibility is a necessary requirement
for proceeding further.
“Postmodernism” is a current movement eschewing all theory in favor of concrete contexts and situations. It
recognizes cultural plurality. Thus, to be ethical in this environment one must dialogue to reach consensus
with many interests and stakeholders. One condition of this dialogue must be respecting other persons’ rights.
Today’s postmodern philosophy will probably not be helpful in reducing the burden of autonomy. For example, Rorty denies the possibility of arriving at any truths through philosophy and the relevance of any
theory of reality. 1 Derrida (as discussed by Madison) likewise denies that there is any truth, only the appearances and words to which we impute whatever meaning we think they may have. 2 Williams takes the same
skeptical view of ethics and moral accountability. 3,4 These writers demolish philosophy, theology, and ethics
simultaneously in full capitulation to the Nietzschean legacy. 2 For Nietzsche, the idea of one truth was an
illusion: All we are capable of discussing are multiple truths seen from many perspectives which are incommensurable with each other. 5
(1) Rorty R. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1979. (2) Madison GB. Coping
with Nietzsche’s legacy—Rorty, Derrida, Gadamer. Phil Today. 1992;36:3–19. (3) Williams B. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1985. (4) Williams B. Moral Luck. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
Press; 1981. (5) MacIntyre AC. Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopaedia, Genealogy, and Tradition. Notre Dame, Ind:
University of Notre Dame Press; 1990: 32–57.
41
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
in medicine is healing. This good is an inherent
quality of the discipline itself, and the basis on
which all parties in a therapeutic relationship can
agree. From this good are derived moral axioms that
make medicine a moral enterprise.
A second consideration for beneficence-in-trust
is the family context, a conglomerate of individual
life plans and values found in the individual’s “biography,” and the family and work context that helps
shape those values and that biography. These values
are important because they embody a set of personal
choices the individual has made over the years. In
fact, values can be seen as the consistent basis for
decisions the individual made in the past, decisions
in which choices among goods had to take place.
In the truth-telling case introduced earlier, it is
overwhelmingly clear that the mother and son had
a close and caring relationship. The knowledge that
no relationship runs automatically and that all relationships take hard work, maintenance, and upkeep, suggests just how valued was this arena of
the patient’s life. Straightforwardly honoring her
wish to know may be a form of cruelty that would
abandon her to her own autonomy. One strategy
for beneficence-in-trust might be to answer her by
emphasizing their loving bond not being broken by
his absence. In this strategy the value or “truth” of
the relationship she had with her son is valued over
telling her he committed suicide.
Strengths. Hence, for the beneficence-in-trust
approach, undue emphasis on autonomy is faulty,
because it may be based on inadequate views of the
patient’s decisional strategies. These strategies are
based on fundamental values that might precede
expressed wishes. Thus the value hierarchy of the
patient is more important than a spur-of-the-moment decision. The patient’s individual view of
what counts as autonomy may be different than that
of the physician. A responsibility of the healthcare
professional is not so much to respect decisions,
although that is surely the case, as to create an environment and a treatment plan that empowers the
decision on the basis of the patient’s values.
Such decisions take place over time and require
that both patients and physicians transcend the
sphere of moral strangers, and become, in some
sense, friends to one another. 62 This point has profound implications for the goal of treatment, the
amount of time that patients and physicians must
spend with one another, and the types of questions
that ought to be asked during medical encounters.
At the very least, negotiation about the good to be
achieved ought to take place explicitly. It should be
apparent to everyone what the “treatment plan”
should be.
However, not all goods and services need to be
negotiated. Some limits ought to be established ahead
of time, for instance, whether or not physician-assisted suicide is to be permitted, or whether medically futile treatment can still be requested. Most
importantly, autonomy is part of an indi-vidual’s
circumstances of life, and cannot be understood
apart from the particularities of that life, cultural
experiences, personal history, expectations of the
medical relationship, and family and personal values.
Weaknesses. The major weakness of the beneficence-in-trust model lies in the way healthcare is
taught and delivered today. If physicians are not
helped to explore their human experiences and to
be sensitive to the human pathos and finitude that
is part of falling ill and dying, then responding to
these deeper values in the patient’s life story becomes difficult, if not impossible. 63 This makes the
problem of healthcare providers and patients being strangers even more important.
Healthcare today is offered by strangers to
strangers. When confronting one another as strangers, patients and physicians alike must spend time
examining fundamental values, something not always possible or reimbursable. Dialogue about values is essential for the proper respect for autonomy
and for the personhood of the patient. This is so
because autonomy is less about decisions than
about the structuring of one’s values over time.
The next category of theories, alternatives to
principlism, roots the normative principles of medical ethics within the context of a person’s story, and
helps one to understand why ethics situated in the
patient’s story has become so important today as
another type of application theory. Thus, rather than
basing one’s professional ethics in, and rather than
resolving medical ethics dilemmas by, appealing to
more abstract principles and moral theory, one does
so by the more complex route of examining (and
reexamining) value priorities behind decisions arising from the healing relationship between physician and patient, and the web of decisions they both
have made in their lives. These application theories, then, provide the strongest foil to relying solely
on principlism for ethical analysis.
Alternatives to Principlism
Communitarian Ethics
To many medical ethicists, a welcome relief from
recent overemphasis on individualism in bioethics
is provided by communitarian ethics. Led by
Etzioni at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, communitarians stress that with powerful
42
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
individual human rights come powerful human
responsibilities for meeting the community’s needs.
Some typical communitarian arguments are, for
example, that children should participate in medical research because they are members of their societies. 34 With the proper consent and oversight of
parents or guardians, they need to be trained in their
obligations to others in the community. Another
communitarian argument can be found in proposals to increase the supply of organs for transplantation by stressing duties to one another in society.
For example, Harris,64 an English ethicist, suggested
that one’s body ought to become the property of
the government at death. In this way organs could
be retrieved because they are in such scarce supply
at present. Strictly speaking, then, communitarian
ethics proposes a new moral theory, and is not itself a theory of application.
Loewy65 has written extensively about the faults
of an autonomy-based ethics for bioethics from the
point of view of the community. Loewy’s argument
for communal ethics goes much deeper than just a
critique of libertarianism, or an argument for obligation and responsibility for one another, however.
He seeks to establish the moral foundation of ethics in the capacity to suffer. This is an expansion of
the communitarian ethic not followed by others.
Exhibit 2-2 develops his argument further for the
interested reader.
Strengths. Faced with the reality of pluralism,
one cannot expect agreement on principles or ideals. One must turn in the other direction, back towards nature and the nature of mankind itself, for
some universal grounding. Then, too, the awareness of the capacity to suffer, for example, permits
one to value more than the mind (principles, values, axioms, and so forth) in ethics, and forces all
people to evaluate their life situations. In turn, those
life situations involve, among many things, caring
for one another. However, a purely caring ethic as
discussed below (without objective guidelines)
would lead to a vacuous justification of actions on
the basis of “care” or “commitment” alone. As
Loewy66 points out, the Nazis certainly “cared”
about the survival of their society in carrying out
their extermination programs.
Weaknesses. Nonetheless, this approach too easily dismisses the role of ethical theory in working
out individual case resolutions. 67 If more abstract
principles are seen as transcendent to individual
lives, their merit is derived from the moral experiences of many peoples in many epochs. If the structures of suffering, or other bases for communitarian
ethics, are seen as immanent to human experience,
they also function across time and civilizations. The
task of interpreting either ethical principles or moral
responses to these human capacities or both is always subject to interpretation. Interpretation is
EXHIBIT 2-2
“SUFFERING” AND COMMUNITARIAN ETHICS
Erich Loewy represents a more fundamental position within the field of communitarian ethics. While he is
sympathetic to virtue ethics, the merits of Kantian and utilitarian ethics, and casuistry as a method in clinical
ethics, he argues that clinical ethics needs a firmer grounding in a more universal principle than any of these
theories can provide. He argues that “a deeper and more universal grounding can be found in the capacity of
sentient beings to suffer.”1(p85) From this straight forward concept, Loewy builds a hierarchy of value: individual beings who can suffer have primary moral worth (ie, worth in and of themselves); those beings who
cannot suffer have secondary moral worth (ie, worth only to others); and those beings who once had this capacity,
but no longer do so (eg, a person in a vegetative state), have symbolic value only (ie, they remind us of what
they once were), but no longer possess primary moral worth. One can readily see why Loewy would support
transplant of organs from anencephalics, for example, but not from an otherwise healthy pig or monkey.
The concept of suffering as a moral basis for ethics is an important return to a new kind of natural law theory
that would ground our obligations in physiological function. However, caring must dovetail into the structures of suffering and relief common to all animals. Otherwise we could too easily take our interpretation of
adequate responses to suffering as moral truth.
(1) Loewy EH. The role of suffering and community in clinical ethics. J Clin Ethics. 1991;2(2):83–89.
43
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
shaped by the individual’s own contemporary culture, traditions, and professional training. Thus, if
a communitarian ethics is relied on totally, one
might miss the wisdom embodied in the formulations of more abstract principles.
Narrative Ethics
A major alternative to the four-principle approach is narrative ethics. Largely an import into
medical ethics from theories of literature, but also
from religious ethics, narrative ethics underscores
the importance of the individual’s story for a proper
moral analysis. Indeed, the argument goes, narrative ethics locates the primacy of different principles
and the richness of their meaning within the context of a person’s story.
Another source of narrative ethics comes from
an emphasis upon negotiation in the patient–physician relationship. Very few patients, for example,
choose to exercise their right to complete advance
directives about their care. Most prefer to leave the
judgment about their care, should they become incompetent, to either their physicians or their families. This seems surprising to autonomy advocates.
On the surface it might be.
But consider that healthcare is offered in the context of relationships—one’s relationships with one’s
own life and family, workplace and culture, and
within the quasi-mystical relationship itself of the
healer and the patient. 68 Patients seem to recognize
ahead of time that the story of sickness and health
is a variable one, not one subject to absolutely firm
a priori conditions that can always be laid down
ahead of time. 69,70 Thus, persons in such relationships, both the patient and the physician, are
“bound” by such stories in ways that have not as
yet been fully explored in bioethics.
Strengths. Principles, it is said, are too abstract,
too rationalistic, and too removed from the moral
and psychological milieu in which moral choices
are actually made; principles ignore a person’s character, life story, cultural background, and gender.
They imply a technical perfection in moral decisions, which is frustrated by the psychological
uniqueness of each moral agent or act.
Furthermore, principles, and indeed all primary
values, need further explication to defend their
prioritization in a particular case. Using the truthtelling case as an example, note that arguing for either the primacy of truth telling or the primacy of
paternalism (protecting the mother on her deathbed
from the horrible news of her son’s suicide) requires
argumentation based on her unique situation at this
time, her value system, sensitivity to relationships,
the healing task, and the professional duties of physicians. Principle-based ethics may be ineffective in
the complexity of these considerations.
Weaknesses. These objections from narrative ethics against a four-principle approach are well-met,
yet it seems that some variation of the four-principle approach will survive the criticisms leveled
against it. First, “principles”—that is to say, fundamental sources from which specific action guides,
like duties or rules, derive and are justified—are
implied in any ethical system. The Hippocratic
ethic, for example, was virtue-based, but its action
guides were rules and principles. Second, there are
equally serious limitations found in any alternative
theory to principlism. Third, the necessity and utility of principles become increasingly evident when
one tries try to apply the alternative theories to actual cases; and, finally, principles are not inherently
incompatible with other theories. The real question,
as old as moral philosophy itself, is how to go from
universal principles to individual moral decisions
and back again.
Feminist Ethics: Ethics of Caring
More radical than other theories of application,
some (or most) feminist ethics reject the four-principle approach to varying degrees. There are at least
three forms of this theory. The first is a “softer” form
than the other two.
This form argues that a feminist perspective can
enhance current medical ethics by providing a different, complementary point of view of a formerly
male-dominated field. Primarily this additional
perspective centers on holistic perspectives on the
sick person and the healing relationship. The argument seems to be a culturally determined one:
Women are traditionally expected and trained to be
more sensitive than men to relationships, contexts,
and value histories. By contrast men are considered
to be interested in abstractions. In the truth-telling
case, women associated with the patient’s care
might add the perspective of what it is like to be a
mother dealing with the loss of a son.
The second form of feminist ethics is more critical than the first. It tends to argue that the previous
perspective is so warped by a need to formulate
principles and abstractions, that a different ethic
altogether is required. This ethic is often called the
ethic of caring, which, as already mentioned, dovetails with a communitarian ethic. Presumably a
44
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
focus on this ethic as a domain of women suggests
that if males do “care,” they do so in radically
different ways that historically, at least, have evacuated the emotional life out of ethical analysis.
Arguing abstract moral principles about truth telling
and duties at a dying mother’s bedside is, according
to this view, not just unfortunate, but desiccated. It
does not represent authentic care for the patient.
Caring is the main aim of healing relationships. 71,72 Adherents of this view hold that women
are more caring than men in the way they approach
ethical decisions. They are presumed to be more
interested in relationships than individual assertions, in reconciliation than in winning arguments,
in “attachment” than detachment, and in nurturing rather than dominating.
The third form of feminist ethics is completely
radical. It holds that there is no validity at all in
any other approach than a feminist mode of reasoning. Identifying all previous moral theory as the
product of a male-dominated society, this form of
radical feminism targets the entire medical complex
as flawed, and asserts that it must be tossed out in
favor of the insights brought to bear from a comprehensive feminist point of view. It is difficult to
see how this position would differ from the other
two with regard to caring for the dying mother in
the truth-telling case, except perhaps to emphasize
how the delivery of care itself is flawed. In particular, the proper care for the son in this relationship
with the mother, it might be argued, was clearly
ignored or mishandled. That might be what led to
his suicide.
Strengths. There is no question that overly theoretical reasoning has characterized ethics in the past.
Then, too, few would, or could, deny the necessity
of an account of caring in any comprehensive theory
of medical ethics. 73,74 Further, both academia and the
medical profession itself have been male-dominated
until recent times, lending credence to at least the
suspicion that such domination also contributes to
thought patterns and general assumptions about
ethics. Gilligan’s75 research on different patterns of
moral reasoning, on which some of these forms of
caring ethics are based, is a serious philosophical
contribution to rectifying this myopia.
Weaknesses. There are both empirical and philosophical objections to the care model of moral reasoning, and to the application theory itself. 76,77
Flanagan78 noted that gender differences, for example, may be based more in social class, culture,
self-image, and personal ideals than in the developmental psychology of Freud or Kohlberg. In the
latters’ analyses, moral development takes the form
of greater and greater abstraction, moving primitive, narcissistic motives to be good (“I don’t want
to get caught.”), through rule-bound behavior
(“Stealing is wrong.”), to acting on the basis of major values that may mean taking risks (“I can steal
these drugs to save someone’s life.”). By contrast,
Gilligan’s ideas of moral development stress compassion for, and sensitivity to, individuals within
their contexts, as well as consulting with others. She
bases her views on research regarding how men and
women differ when analyzing moral dilemmas and
trying to make difficult ethical decisions.
These gender differences and their contribution
to medical ethics surely should be factored into any
future biomedical ethic. But “caring” is subject to such
wide varieties of interpretation that it, too, needs
some grounding in a principle or rule to be a trustworthy guide to specific ethical decision making.
As already noted, Loewy79 has effectively argued
that the Nazis, too, “cared” about their programs,
thus establishing the need for more objective standards in medicine than care itself. In the end, moral
psychology is an adjunct to, but not a replacement
for, ethical principles.
CLINICAL ETHICS THEORIES
A third category of theories are those that offer a
methodological basis for clinical ethics judgments.
This field is so new that very few explicit theories
of clinical ethics have been proposed. I offer my own
distinctions among them; however, these distinctions are not widely recognized. A number of approaches are worth summarizing here. They fall into
two broad categories: methodological clinical ethics theories and methodological schemas. The theories are explained first, then the schemas are
grouped later under one subtitle.
Methodological Clinical Ethics Theories
Casuistry
Another alternative to principlism, particularly
appealing to clinicians because it focuses on concrete and particular cases, is the revival of casuistry. 80 The casuist looks for cases that are obvious
examples of a principle, that is, a case on which
there is sure to be a high degree of agreement among
most, if not all, observers. The casuist then moves
45
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
from the clear to more dubious cases and puts them
in order by paradigm and analogy under some principle. Casuistry, therefore, does not eschew principles,
nor is it incompatible with them. Its nemesis is the
absolutization of principles.
Casuistry has an ancient past. It is the heart of
the Jewish moral tradition. After the Reformation
it entered into Roman Catholic moral theology as
well, first as a method of pastoral care and then as
a moral theory in its own right. Casuistry was (and
is) not without controversy. Note that it depends
on a paradigm case. Reasoning from that standard
case to the particular one at hand involves comparison, analogy, and interpretation. Over time and centuries “principles” might emerge from many similar cases, but these would be inductively derived,
and would perhaps not be applicable to new, unforeseen situations.
Casuistry is familiar and accommodating in clinical ethics. It closely parallels reasoning from case
precedents in Anglo-Saxon law, and clinical reasoning in medicine, where the patient’s situation is
compared to “the classic description” of a disease.
Strengths. Casuistry focuses on a paradigm case
from which the new case resolution is derived by
analogy. This process almost exactly parallels the
process of clinical reasoning itself, which relies
upon “the classic picture” of a disease entity, and
then compares the circumstances of the new patient
to that classic case. It is therefore an important
model that is understandable to clinicians, even
with its historic problems.
As such, then, the rejuvenation of casuistry looks
like an idea whose time has come, given the caveats expressed thus far about overly abstract moral
theory. It is particular, detail- and case-sensitive,
and requires almost exquisite sensitivity to the
subtle nuances of caring for the individuality of the
patient and her values. How often have you heard
a teacher or colleague refer to a personal experience with a difficult case to exemplify how to behave now, in the face of another similar case?
Weaknesses. Casuists try to circumvent the
moral pluralism of contemporary society by historical analogies with the past. But casuistry is a product of the culture of the Middle Ages when there
was consensus on certain principles (the Ten Commandants, for example). It runs into difficulties
when there is no such consensus, because the moral
viewpoint of any society defines both what it considers a dilemma and what counts as a paradigm
case. 81,82 Casuistry, as it was used in Jewish and
Catholic moral theology, functioned within a context
of a common belief in God, the destiny of humankind, and the acceptance of authoritative interpretation and rules. 83 No such consensus exists today
in a pluralistic society.
More to the point, no such consensus exists
even within a moral community. The heart of this
objection lies in the argument that using paradigm
cases from the past is like comparing apples and oranges. The paradigms don’t “fit,” so the argument
goes, and hence the analogies with current cases are
invalid. Two brief examples bring this problem to
the fore.
A pulmonary specialist might ask a Rabbi
whether it is ever justifiable to withdraw a ventilator from a dying patient. The Rabbi may compare
this dilemma with a paradigm case that happened
in a Russian village in the 14th century. There a
woodchopper was disturbing the dying process of
a neighbor. The families disputed. Eventually the
Rabbi was consulted. He resolved the issue by determining that even though one disputant depended for his living on woodchopping, nothing
should be permitted to disturb the neighbor’s dying, as that was a call from God. Today’s Rabbi would
then apply the story by asserting that anything could
be withdrawn that “disturbs” (ie, prolongs) the dying process even if the physician’s living “depends
on” (ie, is “oriented to”) preserving life.
Note the problems, however. Today’s medical
environment is virtually nothing like a 14th century
Russian village. Common beliefs are not shared.
Persons may not agree that dying is God’s calling a
person for a final journey. Or a different Rabbi (more
Orthodox, for example) might arrive at a different
conclusion. Notice, too, how a moral community
of the 14th century is different from the pluralistic
society of today.
A second example further demonstrates this
point. In arguing about the morality of separating
conjoined twins when one is directly killed in order to reconstruct the heart of the other, one might
refer to a plethora of analogous situations84—each
analogy is “like” the separation case. Killing one to
save another in a hostage situation, killing in combat to avoid being captured by the enemy, a machine on which two persons depend and one must
die, fetal reduction in multiple pregnancies, to some
extent survival of the fittest, and so on.
In every example a great deal of interpretation
occurs, not only about what features of the current
and paradigm cases are parallel, but also some
analogies between key concepts in both cases. Further, the conclusions from one commentator to an46
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
other may differ.
As a result, casuistry can function as a method
of case analysis, but not as a reliable guide for moral
theory or practice. Yet this criticism can be leveled
against all clinical ethics theories because, by their
very nature and purpose, their focus is on clinical
resolution rather than on justification of moral
theory.
Moral Pluralism
A different approach is offered by several thinkers who have developed clinical ethics. Jonsen,
Siegler, and Winslade define clinical ethics as “the
identification, analysis, and resolution of moral
problems that arise in the care of a particular
patient.”85(p3) Their book on clinical ethics develops
models of reasoning for each set of clinical problems they address under different categories. In effect, these authors define patterns of cases that call
forth different kinds of moral analysis depending
on the pattern. Combining the wrong kind of moral
analysis with a different category of cases leads to
poor outcomes. A good example would be using
public policy analysis, which works for larger questions of allocation of healthcare, to the truth-telling
case of the dying mother and suicide son.
Baruch Brody,86 in another example, proposes a
theory of moral pluralism for clinical ethics. His
goal is to provide a moral framework for analyzing
questions of conflicting values and resolving them.
The name he gives to his model is “the model of
conflicting appeals.” The pluralism of his approach
is evident as he writes: “The moral theory advocated in this book is not an abstract moral theory, a
theory whose mode of application is unclear. It takes
from each of the traditional abstract moral theories
a component that needs to be combined with components of other theories in a way that produces a
type of model for decision making that can be applied to difficult cases.”86(p8) In effect, then, mixing
and matching theories and concepts leads to a perception of pragmatism in employing different theories and concepts. One uses what works. After all,
ethics, like medicine, is a practical discipline. It
seeks resolution and good (defensible) conduct.
Unitary Theory
A number of ethicists have argued that clinical
ethics is a type of moral hermeneutic. 87 Hermeneutics (after the Greek messenger to the gods, Hermes)
is a name for a theory of interpretation. It has already been shown how much interpretation is involved in moral analysis of cases. One view of
hermeneutical clinical ethics theory is that medical
practice itself in the clinical context can function as
a unifying principle for other theories of ethics. Put
another way, clinical ethics as medical hermeneutics interprets the clinical situation in light of a balance of other values that, while guiding the decision making process, also contribute to the very
weighting of those values. In this view, the case itself originates ideas not only about which values
ought to predominate in any resolution but also
about clinical rules that might become useful in
other, similar cases.
What the clinical ethics theories under this rubric share, then, are moral strategies for resolving
classes of cases rather than just individual ones.
Further, there is a theory attached to these strategies. This theory (what I call unitary theory) proposes why one, rather than another, moral strategy
is appropriate for each class or category of cases. A
simple example would be that autonomy analysis
would apply to a competent patient. The limits of
the physician’s recommendations might be effortful
persuasion. If the patient is incompetent and has
no valid or trustworthy surrogates, then autonomy
analysis is less important than that based on beneficence. This is why advance directives are still debated—are they adequate to discover the alert but
incompetent patient’s values, for example?88
Clinical Ethics Rules
Related to the normative ethics theory (which is
one of the alternatives to principlism that has already been discussed), clinical ethics rules is yet a
different model. This model establishes a set of clinical ethics rules that would help interpret important
principles with respect to different kinds of cases. 89
An example of such a rule about self-determination
and critical illness might be: “The less likely a good
outcome might be, the lower the quality of consent
or advance directive that is required to withhold or
withdraw care.” Obviously, if one can hold out some
hope for a critically ill patient, then his or her consent to continue to treat is important to obtain.
At the other end of the scale, if there is no hope,
then according to this clinical ethics rule, a physician would not be required to obtain consent, for
example, to withhold resuscitation efforts. (This is
called a unilateral DNR [do not resuscitate] order.)
Note that rules such as these derive from many
year’s experiences with patient care, rather than
47
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
solely from moral theory itself.
Along these lines, the most specific clinical ethics methodology with the least amount of theory
can be found in a small, useful book by Junkerman
and Schiedermayer,90 intended for clinicians. The
authors, like Jonsen, Siegler, and Winslade before
them, take up specific clinical problems, for example
the incapacitated patient, and in several short steps
help a clinician ask the right questions and provide
needed information (about the law, ways to assess
competence, and other issues). 90
By contrast, the most theoretical clinical ethics
proposal can be found in Graber and Thomasma,
Theory and Practice in Medical Ethics. 5 The authors
propose a “unitary theory” of medical ethics, stated
as follows:
Certain conditions (C) are present in this case such
that the probability (X) exists that Value (V) A will
be judged more important than B by (I) interpreters because the Principle (P) P’ will more likely
apply to the case than P”. 5(p194)
This statement abstracts from the various components of forming a clinical ethics judgment and
the clinical ethics methodologies that have been
considered in this discussion. Note that it also tries
to protect the role of moral principles as well. Reflect back on the truth-telling case and apply this
unitary theory:
Conditions (C) are present in this case—the
mother is dying and the son committed suicide.
These conditions make it more probable (X) that the
values of compassion, respect, protection from
harm, avoiding anxiety (V A1, A2, A3, A4, etc.) will
be judged more important than other values such
as respecting her autonomy, her right to know, and
answering truthfully (V B1, B2, B3, etc.). The virtues
of the interpreters (I) also enter into the decisional
schema. Physicians involved in caring for this dying mother will be likely to interpret the “A” values to be more important in this case than the “B”
ones compared to, say, lawyers or an ivory-tower
philosopher. Finally, defense of the priority of the
“A” values over the “B” ones means that the principle (P) of nonmaleficence (P’) will be invoked
more than the principle of autonomy (P”).
The reason for abstracting this unitary theory
from clinical ethics methodologies is to stress the
need to pay close attention to each and all of the
components, rather than just to one or another. This
general theory closely follows and impacts other
independent views of the nature of clinical ethics
in that: (a) it is a process of decision making involving a case to be resolved; (b) certain prominent conditions are creating the moral dilemma; (c) there are
values at risk that must be weighed and balanced;
(d) interpreters such as the patient and physician
must perform that adjudication; and (e) moral principles that function as objective standards must be
reconciled with the actions in the case.
These theories of clinical ethics hold out great
promise as long as they are not misperceived as a
foundation for moral theory itself. All such theories attempt to distill the best of more general moral
theories down to a lesser level of clinical abstraction. 91 There is a limit to the ability of ethics to conform to medical realities, however. The language
and concerns of medical ethics sound very different than the language of cardiology or other specialties that are brought to bear on patient care.
Hence, as Sheehan notes, “problem solving in clinical ethics is a necessary but not sufficient goal in
teaching.”92(p292)
Yet the primary purpose of medical ethics is practical. As Howard Brody notes: “Medical ethics, after all, is supposed to be a guide to action; and our
high-sounding ethical theories and methods will
look unimpressive if they do not, in the end, offer
practical guidance in the sometimes confusing
world of medicine.”21(p35)
Methodological Schemas: Clinical Ethics Workups
Instead of focusing on clinical ethics theories
for resolution of conflicts, many medical ethics
educators developed their own methodological
schemas—clinical ethics workups. These are
practical models for “working up” a case. These
workups can be accomplished using grid models, workup guides, or mediation models, or perhaps even some combination of approaches in the
really difficult cases. What works best for any
given individual will be guided by the specifics
of the case as well as the ethicist’s own particular theoretical views, as has already been discussed in this chapter.
Grid Models
There are many grid models in the literature, but
for the purposes of this discussion the focus will be
on the three most commonly used: the “Thomasma
Contextual Grid,” the “Glaser Grid,” and the
“Siegler Grid.”
The “contextual grid” model lexically orders pri48
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
macy of place to autonomy or to beneficence or even
to paternalism for public safety according to levels
of criticality of care, on the one hand, and levels of
numbers of persons affected on the other. 61 This
model (Figure 2-2) underscores the importance of
context in prioritizing values. Consider, for example, the lowered requirement for consent in the
emergency room (ER) than in a primary care setting or the difference between triage that would be
performed for a serious burn affecting one patient
and that performed on a busload of children burned
in a crash. The most intense disaster might be exemplified by Hiroshima or the battlefield where triage is aimed at those least injured and most likely
to survive rather than at those most severely injured
and therefore least likely to survive. Grids such as
Fig. 2-2. The Thomasma contextual grid. This contextual grid model orders the seriousness of the medical event,
combined with the numbers of persons involved, to assist caregivers in ethical decision making. As the level of
seriousness of the illness or accident increases from 1 to 3 (vertical bar), the less the caregivers need to be concerned
about autonomy and the greater the degree of beneficence and even paternalism that might be justified in order to
save an individual’s life. So in box 1, primacy of place belongs to patient choice in working with a physician in a
primary care setting. By contrast, in box 3, in an emergency situation, primacy of place goes to the assumption that
life must be saved, and an intervention begun unless the individual specifically objects. Similarly along the horizontal axis, the greater the number of individuals affected, say a family in the 2nd tier, or society in the 3rd, the greater
the justification to act for the common good over the objections of individuals. A good example might be a cholera
outbreak, or the requirement to obtain inoculations before attending school. The grid illustrates how the context
helps clarify and even determine the balance of principles in resolving each moral dilemma that arises in health care.
It is not sufficient to argue that one or another principle should always predominate in medical ethics.
Source: Thomasma DC. A contextual grid for medical ethics. In: Bruhn JG, Henderson G, eds. Values in Health Care:
Choices and Conflicts. Springfield, Ill: Charles C Thomas Publishers; 1991: 117–118.
this one help everyone understand why priorities
among values and duties vary, not just from case to
case, but also from context to context.
Glaser has proposed a unidimensional grid (Figure 2-3) in that he believes there is really only one
ultimate principle, beneficence, which he calls the
“neglected constant of ethics.” Conflict occurs, he
thinks, not among principles so much as among
realms. He identifies three realms: the personal,
the institutional, and the social. In his view, there
is no human possibility for resolving conflicts
among these realms, but he does propose a model
for moving from the personal to the social. 93 Considering the truth-telling case, then, Glaser might
argue that its inherent conflict between compassion
and truth telling is actually a conflict between actOne Person
Family/Community
Society


Tertiary One
Tertiary Group
Tertiary Society


1–3
2–3
3–3




S econdary One
Secondary Group
Secondary Society


1–2
2–2
3–2




Primary O ne
Primary Group
Primary Society


1–1
2–1
3–1
Level
of
Care
Number of Persons Affected
49
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
Fig. 2-3. The Glaser unidimensional grid. Glaser conceptualizes beneficence as the “overlooked constant of ethics”—it is the
foundational principle for bioethics. In any ethical decision, the underlying intention is to “do good”—the dilemmas arise
when there are competing goods to be done. This concept involves identifying the underlying and possibly conflicting
beneficent goals. Typical ethical analysis has focused exclusively on the individual physician’s duty of beneficence to the
patient. However, there is also a reciprocal beneficence required from the patient to other individuals. There is a still wider
view of beneficence involving institutions and societies doing “good” as well. This describes three realms of beneficence.
The grid expands this further to look at doing good to individuals, institutions, and society within each of these realms.
Glaser proposes an analysis of the three fundamental realms of beneficence utilizing a grid of concentric circles to illustrate
the complex relationships between these three realms.
Individual beneficence: The simplest realm of beneficence is the realm of individual beneficence. Here the concern is primarily with the good of individuals and their relationships, relationships that exist within one individual between various
values and needs—physical, emotional, mental, and spiritual—and between two or more individuals. However, there is an
element of beneficence required from the individual toward the institution or society. Therefore, in this realm of individual
beneficence there are three subperspectives: (1) within and between individuals, (2) from individuals toward organizations,
and (3) from individuals toward the larger society.
Organizational beneficence: Normally the use of the word beneficence has only individuals as its referent. The present
analysis understands beneficence in terms of organizations as well. Organizations are both subject and object of beneficence. A primary object of organizational beneficence is the net organizational good, that is, a state of organizational vigor
and development that enables the organization to maximize its purpose now and into the future. But such pursuit of the
organizational good must also consider the individual good of those within the organization. Organizational beneficence
must also attend to the common good of the society within which the organization exists. Thus there are three subperspectives:
(1) primarily to the organizational good, (2) while considering the good of the individual, and (3) the good of the overall society.
Societal beneficence: The final realm of an ethic of beneficence is that of society. Societal beneficence is another term for the
ethics of the commons. The many conflicting needs/goods of the commons—education, housing, defense, health care, art,
infrastructure, and so forth—must be balanced to achieve the common good. But in seeking this common good of society,
the good of individuals and the good of organizations cannot simply be ignored. As in the other two realms of beneficence,
the concern must look in three directions: (1) primarily to the common good—the net good of society as a whole—and
secondarily to (2) the good of organizations and (3) the good of individuals.
Determining the primary level of ethical concern: Most issues have ethical significance on all three levels and need to be
addressed on each level appropriately. However, these levels are rarely of equal importance. Some issues are primarily
“institutional issues,” with the individual/societal levels being secondary considerations. Other issues are primarily issues
of individual ethics, and still others are essentially issues of society ethics. One of the fundamental starting points for
ethical discussion will be to determine which level is the preeminent level of ethical importance.
Adapted with permission from Glaser JW. Three Realms of Ethics: Individual, Institutional, Societal. Kansas City, Mo: Sheed &
Ward, 1994: 10–15. Copyright© 1994, John W. Glaser.
1. INDIVIDUAL REALM
a. Individual Good
b. organizational good
c. societal good
2. ORGANIZATIONAL REALM
a. individual good
b. Organizational Good
c. societal good
3. SOCIETAL REALM
a. individual good
b. organizational good
c. Societal Good
I
I
I
O
O
O
S
S
S
50
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
ing in a personal relationship tied to the particulars of the mother’s case and acting as an agent of
the hospital or of society (which might require balancing the case more towards truth telling than
compassion).
Siegler developed a grid of four primary issues
through which one would work to analyze a case. 94
This four-category grid (Figure 2-4) was later employed by Siegler and his co-authors, Jonsen and
Winslade, as the basis of their book on clinical ethics. It focuses on: (1) indications for medical intervention, (2) patient preferences, (3) quality of life,
and (4) socioeconomic factors. 85(p5) One first establishes whether there is a problem in the first catFig. 2-4. Four-dimension grid in ethical analysis. An ethical analysis should begin with an orderly review of these four topics.
Jonsen, Siegler, and Winslade recommend that the same order be followed in all cases: (1) medical indications, (2) patient preferences, (3) quality of life, and (4) contextual features. This procedure will lay out the ethically relevant facts of the case (or show
where further information is needed) before debate begins. It should be noted that this order of review does not constitute an
order of ethical priority. The topics of medical indications, patient preferences, and quality of life bring out these essential features of the case. Yet every medical case is embedded in a larger context of persons, institutions, financial and social arrangements. Patient care is influenced, positively or negatively, by the possibility and the constraints of that context. At the same time,
the context itself is affected by the decisions made by or about the patient. Adapted with permission from Jonsen AR, Siegler M,
Winslade WJ. Clinical Ethics: A Practical Approach to Ethical Decisions in Clinical Medicine. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1998: 5–12.
MEDICAL INDICATIONS
1. What is patient’s medical problem? history?
diagnosis? prognosis?
2. Is problem acute? chronic? critical? emergent? reversible?
3. What are goals of treatment?
4. What are probabilities of success?
5. What are plans in case of therapeutic failure?
6. In sum, how can this patient be benefited
by medical and nursing care, and how can
harm be avoided?
CONTEXTUAL FEATURES
1. Are there family issues that might influence
treatment decisions?
2. Are there provider (physicians and nurses)
issues that might influence treatment decisions?
3. Are there financial and economic factors?
4. Are there religious, cultural factors?
5. Is there any justification to breach confidentiality?
6. Are there problems of allocation of resources?
7. What are legal implications of treatment
decisions?
8. Is clinical research or teaching involved?
9. Any provider or institutional conflict of interest?
QUALITY OF LIFE
1. What are the prospects, with or without
treatment, for a return to patient’s normal
life?
2. Are there biases that might prejudice provider’s evaluation of patient’s quality of life?
3. What physical, mental, and social deficits
is patient likely to experience if treatment
succeeds?
4. Is patient’s present or future condition such
that continued life might be judged undesirable by [him/her]?
5. Any plan and rationale to forgo treatment?
6. What plans for comfort and palliative care?
PATIENT PREFERENCES
1. What has the patient expressed about
preferences for treatment?
2. Has patient been informed of benefits and
risks, understood, and given consent?
3. Is patient mentally capable and legally competent? What is evidence of incapacity?
4. Has patient expressed prior preferences
(eg, Advance Directives)?
5. If incapacitated, who is appropriate surrogate? Is surrogate using appropriate standards?
6. Is patient unwilling or unable to cooperate
with medical treatment? If so, why?
7. In sum, is patient’s right to choose being
respected to extent possible in ethics and
law?
51
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
egory, and then moves through each of the others
in turn, noting where difficulties arise. This commonly used grid stresses factors or realms that must
be considered in clinical judgments that most often
arise in refusal of therapy during end-of-life decision making. It does not lead to the self-critical ethical analysis found in the “Clinical Ethics Workup
Guide” to follow. Jonsen, Siegler, and Winslade covered a whole range of issues with their analysis.
Howard Brody focused on a decision tree analytic
method to cover similar issues. 21
Clinical Ethics Workup Guide
Others have targeted a specific patient population for a workup. A good example is Pellegrino’s95
effort to combine both a substantive and procedural framework for analyzing cases that arise in
perinatology and neonatology. His ten-step workup
(Exhibit 2-3) differs slightly from the next example,
but moves, as the latter does, from facts, through values, to a decision and its justification. Similar efforts
have been made to target issues in other specialties. 96
The clinical ethics workup guide described here
was developed by the author in 1973, and was first
published in 1978. 97 It was used as the basis both
for a philosophy of medicine98 and for the structure
of a course. 99 It is reproduced here (Exhibit 2-4) as
an example.
EXHIBIT 2-3
PELLEGRINO’S TEN-STEP WORKUP
1.
What are the facts—diagnosis, prognosis, treatment?
2.
What are the clinical options for action?
3.
What does the clinician perceive as his ethical problem with each option?
4.
Separate the ethical from the nonethical issues for the clinician.
5.
Give moral implications for each option, with moral arguments for and against each choice.
6.
On the basis of the above, decide what the right and good thing is to do.
7.
Define the nature of conflicts between and among decision makers, moral and nonmoral.
8.
Are these conflicts resolvable or negotiable?
9.
Reexamine your own decisions in light of all the above.
10.
Taking all into consideration, what is in the patient’s best interest to the extent that it is ascertainable?
Source: Edmund D. Pellegrino, MD, John Carroll Professor of Medicine and Medical Ethics, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC.
Mediation Models
Unlike the previous workups, there is another,
newer modality that moves in a different direction.
In keeping with utilitarian and narrative ethics,
mediation and conflict resolution models tend to
try to “open up” the discussion rather than to reach
closure right away. In this sense they are like discursive or consensus ethics for which no immediate principle is on the table for discussion other than
a commitment to listen and appreciate individual
viewpoints. The first step of such an ethical workup
is not to avoid conflict, but to own it, not to move
away to the realm of principles, but to stay committed to solving small pieces of the problem. 100 This
method is based on principles of arbitration and
mediation, and promises to help in the clinical management of difficult moral conflicts. 101
Strengths. Workups are perhaps the ultimate
teaching and analytical tools in clinical ethics. They
demonstrate clearly that ethics is a discipline,
and that following a pattern of thought assists
healthcare professionals in establishing what values are at risk and how seriously a course of action
must be defended. They also have the potentiality
for considering all of the human factors in a case,
as narrative ethics requires.
Weaknesses. In the end, the individuals employing the workup must present a coherent and defen52
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
EXHIBIT 2-4
ETHICAL WORKUP GUIDE
The workup is an attempt to distill from the discipline of ethics an essential process of moral reasoning which
can be applied to ethical dilemmas in patient care. Other heuristic devices are available as well. The workup
itself should not be an object of extensive discussion, but rather the points towards which it guides the discussion of the case itself.
No attempt is made to force you to take one or another ethical position. Instead, you are asked to follow only
one absolute: Come up with an ethically justifiable course of action for the patient that meshes with your
professional duty to act in the best interest of the patient.
Step 1: What are the facts in the case? Be sure to research any medical facts not presented in the case, but possibly
relevant to its outcome.
Step 2: What are the values at risk in the case? Describe all relevant values of the physicians, patients, housestaff,
nurses, hospital administration, the institution, and society. This may not be an exhaustive listing of interests
in the case.
Step 3: Determine the principal conflicts between values, professional norms, and between ethical axioms, rules and
principles. Conflicts can occur among prima facie values, absolute values, norms, axioms, rules, and principles,
and/or amongst each other. The primary conflict, in the final analysis, is the one you determine it to be. In
determining this primary conflict, you should explain if you think principles and values are absolute and
whether to be ethical means to act on principle, whether you hold that they are only at first glance, that is,
prima facie absolute, and can yield to other important values and principles in the case.
Step 4: Determine possible courses of action, and which values and ethical principles each course of action would protect
or infringe. At this step you will grapple with fundamental moral theory. Are you willing to seek a solution that
is based on a single principle? Or are you willing to note that each decision you might make will place some
values, principles, etc., at risk? Would you then be satisfied with being a utilitarian, that is, by protecting as
many values and principles as possible in the case?
Step 5: Make a decision in the case. Decide upon a course of action for resolving the ethical dilemma.
Step 6: Defend this course of action. Why is “X “ better than “Y”? In defending this course of action, ask whether
consensus ethics is appropriate. Is doing what most think is right, necessarily right? Should the decision rest
on a single value or principle? Instead should it protect as many values as possible? Or should it rest on the
virtue of the caregivers or institutions in which it takes place?
Respond to each of the following:
1.
Were any values, principles, norms, axioms, rules weighted more heavily than others? If so, which
values, principles, etc., were most important to protect and why? If not, was the case decided by
protecting as many of the values in the case as possible?
2.
Try to identify the type of moral reasoning applied in resolving the case (utilitarian, deontologic,
virtue-ethic, care ethics, casuistic ethics, other) and state whether it was used because of your general
preference in similar situations or because of its particular applicability to this specific case.
3.
Universality test: Would you be willing that your decision and its reasons become universal law, and
apply to every similar situation or to yourself? Is this test actually a valid way to determine what is
ethical?
4.
What role does society play in making this decision palatable? Can you imagine a different society
and a different solution? Would the decision require you to change the political system or the way
health care is delivered? Are social and political duties a feature of the nature of the profession and
clinical judgment? Do you believe in cultural relativism?
5.
How does this decision relate to others you have made in your life, in courses, and in actuality as a
professional?
Reproduced with permission from Thomasma DC, Marshall PA. Clinical Medical Ethics: Cases and Readings. NewYork: University Press of America; 1995: 11–12.
53
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
sible moral theory of their own for their position. A
good goal of all medical education, then, is that students can articulate and defend their value judgments with their patients, their peers, and in society at large. Those value judgments of necessity
involve priorities the individual professional must
employ and defend.
In summary, there are no perfect or absolute theories to guide the ethical practitioner through the
difficult decisions that must be made for some patients. Making a serious medical ethical decision can
be difficult, not only due to the problem but also to
the method or theory employed. Each theory has
its strengths and weaknesses. Furthermore, each
theory differs from the others, sometimes starkly,
sometimes in more subtle ways. This chapter has
used the truth-telling case to weave a consistent
thread throughout the exploration of ethical theories. Exhibit 2-5 summarizes the resolution of the
truth-telling case as it appeared in the chapter.
EXHIBIT 2-5
RESOLUTION OF TRUTH-TELLING CASE ACCORDING TO SPECIFIC THEORIES
Case synopsis: A 71-year-old widow is dying of end-stage breast cancer. She is heavily medicated but is still
able to converse reasonably well. Her husband died 8 years ago; her two sisters are also dead, one of breast
cancer. Her one source of comfort has been her only child, who took a leave from his work for 6 months to
be with his mother during this final episode of her life. As she slips in and out of consciousness, she asks for
her son. She does not know that he committed suicide the day before, leaving a note indicating that he
wanted to “be there” with his aunts and father before his mother arrived. Should the patient be told that her
son is dead?
Theory
Action
Reason
Utilitarian
Tell patient
 Prevents harm to society because it prevents doctors
from “holding out hope” when there is none
or
Don’t tell patient
Prevents harm to this patient (unnecessary grief),
other patients, and thus to society as a whole
Deontology
Tell patient
Protects the truths essential for social life
or
Delay telling patient
Would still ultimately tell patient, thus protecting truths
Virtue Theory
Back off telling patient
Keeps the patient’s dying process dignified
or
Tell patient
Truth outweighs compassion and is essential for human
character
Beneficence-in-Trust
Don’t tell patient; instead
“Truth” of her relationship with her son is more imporemphasize that the bond
tant than the truth of his suicide
with patient’s son is not
broken by his absence
Narrative Ethics
Cannot use this theory to
Narrative ethics is too complex for a case such as this
determine an action in
one, more of the patient’s and son’s story would have
this case
to be known
Feminist Ethics
Tell patient
Women understand relationships between mother and child
Unitary Theory
Don’t tell patient
Values of compassion, respect, and protecting from harm
outweigh her autonomy, her right to know, and answering truthfully
54
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
CONCLUSION
A brief glance back over the various theoretical
domains (public policy medical ethics theories, applied medical ethics theories, and clinical ethics
theories) and the levels of moral reasoning (principles, axioms, and rules) is sufficient to show why
developing a coherent ethical methodology is complex. This holds true for all walks of life, but certainly so for medicine.
One physician or patient might hold a rightsbased ethic, while another might hold a duty-based
ethic. Similarly, one might stress the virtues necessary to ensure rules are followed, while another
might stress the importance of developing public
standards and protocols for ethical treatment. Still
another might hold respect for persons as a primary
principle, while another would prefer to reason in
the tradition of utilitarianism. Because of this moral
pluralism, MacIntyre argued that persons in different spheres of moral enquiry, with their different
traditions, start from such radically different perspectives that they are almost incapable of conversing with one another.
Nonetheless there is in medical ethics more hope
for a better grounding of principles, rules, virtues,
and moral psychology than in any other field of ethics. That hope rests on the universality of the phenomena of the experiences of illness and healing
and on the proximate and long-term aims of medicine. The advantages of applied medical ethics theories and clinical ethics theories, especially the fourprinciple approach, can be preserved if they are
grounded in the realities of the patient–physician
relationship. The discussion in this chapter of problems with the primacy of autonomy demonstrates the
reasoning required for giving priority ordering to
the principles based on the relationship itself.
Clearly, the proposed alternatives to “principlism”
can enrich any theory of medical ethics. None is independent of principles, rules, or obligations. Otherwise any theory succumbs to the debilities of subjectivism and relativism. What is required is some
comprehensive philosophical underpinning for
medical ethics that will link the great moral traditions with principles and rules and with the new
emphasis on moral psychology. A true moral philosophy of medicine is required. But where to turn?
A radical relativism today is reinforced by the
growing awareness of cultural pluralism. As the
Western version of ethical theories noted in this
chapter comes into contact with other cultures,
sharper definitions of points of conflict and agreement can be expected. One of the most important
features of the debate about bioethics in the United
States today is the growing awareness of the inadequacy of the autonomy assumption. Increasingly,
as American bioethicists encounter their colleagues
from other parts of the world, the autonomy assumption becomes more glaring as a critically
unexamined component of their thought.
Yet experience teaches that persons from different cultures can agree on ethical standards. Such
experience calls into question the ultimate importance of resolving fundamental disputes about the
nature of persons and the cultural environment, and
instead focuses attention on the practical realities
that shape common experience.
In bioethics the major struggle has been to direct
technology to good human ends. Despite debates in
academic spheres about the proper ethical theory,
physicians and patients will ask within their relationship, “What is the right and good thing for me to
do?” “What counts as ‘the’ good for patients, and what
kind of actions will achieve it?” No one making practical ethical decisions can escape these questions.
In the last 30 years, the philosophical underpinnings of medical ethics have undergone a profound
development. There is no predicting where this
development will lead, especially as individual
awareness of other values increases due to almost instantaneous communication with people and thinkers from other cultures. Physicians and other
healthcare professionals must be familiar not only
with traditional ethical theories, but also with attempts to work out their application to many clinical
and other practice situations, such as managed care.
After all, medical ethics, like medicine itself, is a fusion of theory and practice. Only in this way will they
help establish the medical ethics of the 21st century.
REFERENCES
1.
Campbell CS. The crumbling foundations of medical ethics. Theor Med Bioeth. 1998;19(2):143–152.
2.
Rothman DJ. Strangers at the Bedside: A History of How Law and Bioethics Transformed Medical Decision Making.
New York: Basic Books; 1991.
55
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
3.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. A Philosophical Basis of Medical Practice: Toward a Philosophy and Ethic of the Healing Professions. New York: Oxford University Press; 1981.
4.
Marshall P, Thomasma DC, Bergsma J. Intercultural reasoning: The challenge for international bioethics. Camb
Q Healthc Ethics. 1994;3(3):321–328.
5.
Graber GC, Thomasma DC. Theory and Practice in Medical Ethics. New York: Continuum Books; 1989.
6.
Donovan LJ. Ethics: Our heritage. Georgetown Magazine. 1995;27(1):37–42.
7.
Engelhardt HT Jr. Bioethics and Secular Humanism: The Search for a Common Morality. Philadelphia, Pa: Trinity
Press International; 1991.
8.
Engelhardt HT Jr. Understanding faith traditions in the context of health care: Philosophy as a guide for the
perplexed. In: Marty ME, Vaux KL, eds. Health/Medicine and the Faith Traditions. Philadelphia, Pa: Fortress Press;
1982: 163–184.
9.
Thomasma DC. Bioethics and international human rights. J Law Med Ethics. 1997;25(4):295–306.
10.
Kleinman A. Medicine, anthropology of. In: Reich WT, ed-in-chief. Encyclopedia of Bioethics. Rev ed, Vol 3. New
York: Macmillan; 1995: 1667–1674.
11.
Graber GC. Basic theories in medical ethics. In: Monagle JM, Thomasma DC, eds. Medical Ethics: A Guide for
Health Professionals. Rockville, Md: Aspen Publishers; 1988: 462–475.
12.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. For the Patient’s Good: The Restoration of Beneficence in Health Care. New York:
Oxford University Press; 1988.
13.
Mill JS. Utilitarianism. Indianapolis, Ind: Hackett Publishing Company; 1979.
14.
ten Have H. Jeremy Bentham: Een quantum theorie van de ethiek. (Jeremy Bentham: A Quantum Theory of Ethics)
Kampen: Kok Agora; 1986.
15.
Bentham J. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. Oxford: The Clarendon Press; 1823.
16.
Mill JS. Principles of Political Economy: With Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy. Ashley WJ, ed. Fairfield,
NJ: AM Kelley; 1987 [reprint of 1909 edition].
17.
Kant I. Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. Beck LW, trans, Wolff RP, ed. Indianapolis, Ind: Bobbs-Merrill; 1969.
18.
Fried C. Right and Wrong. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1978.
19.
Mill JS. On Liberty. New York: FS Crofts & Co; 1947.
20.
Ross WD. The Right and the Good. Oxford: The Clarendon Press; 1930.
21.
Brody H. Ethical Decisions in Medicine. 2nd ed. Boston: Little Brown & Co; 1981.
22.
Veatch RM. A Theory of Medical Ethics. New York: Basic Books; 1981.
23.
Bennett WJ, ed. The Book of Virtues: A Treasury of Great Moral Stories. New York: Simon & Schuster; 1993.
24.
Pence GE. Ethical Options in Medicine. Oradell, NJ: Medical Economics Company, Book Division; 1980.
25.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. The Virtues in Medical Practice. New York: Oxford University Press; 1993.
26.
St. Thomas Aquinas. On Aristotle’s Love and Friends, Ethics, Books VIII–IX. Guway P, trans. Providence, RI: Providence College Press; 1951.
56
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
27.
St. Thomas Aquinas. Summa Theologica. Fairweather AM, trans. Philadelphia, Pa: Westminster Press; 1954.
28.
MacIntyre AC. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. 2nd ed. Notre Dame, Ind: University of Notre Dame Press; 1984.
29.
Pellegrino ED. Toward a virtue-based normative ethics for the health professions. Kennedy Inst Ethics J.
1995;5(3):253–277.
30.
MacIntyre AC. Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopaedia, Genealogy, and Tradition. Notre Dame, Ind:
University of Notre Dame Press; 1990.
31.
McCormick R. Bioethics: A moral vacuum? America. 1999;180(17):8–12.
32.
Thomasma DC, Kushner T, eds. Birth to Death: Science and Bioethics. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press; 1996.
33.
Clouser KD, Gert B. A critique of principlism. J Med Philos. 1990;15(2):219–236.
34.
US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of
Human Subjects of Research. Fed Regist. April 18, 1979;44(76):23192–23197. US GPO, 1978, DHEW Pub (OS)
78-0012–0014.
35.
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1989.
36.
Gillon R. Medical ethics: Four principles plus attention to scope. Br Med J. 1994;309(6948):184–188.
37.
Gillon R, ed. Principles of Health Care Ethics. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1994.
38.
Beauchamp TL, McCullough LB. Medical Ethics: The Moral Responsibilities of Physicians. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall; 1984: 22–51.
39.
Hippocrates. The Oath in Hippocrates. Jones WHS, trans. Cambridge, Mass: Loeb Classical Library #147, Harvard
University Press; 1972: 299–302.
40.
Rawls J. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1971: 302–303.
41.
Daniels N. Justice, fair procedures, and the goals of medicine. Hastings Cent Rep. 1996;26(6):10–12.
42.
Brody BA. Quality of scholarship in bioethics. J Med Philos. 1990;15(2):161–178.
43.
Holmes RL. The limited relevance of analytical ethics to the problems of bioethics. J Med Philos. 1990;15(2):143–159.
44.
Gustafson JM. Moral discourse about medicine: A variety of forms. J Med Philos. 1990;15(2):125–142.
45.
Thomasma DC. The possibility of a normative medical ethics. J Med Philos. 1980:5(3):249–259.
46.
Engelhardt HT Jr. The Foundations of Bioethics. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986.
47.
Engelhardt HT Jr, Rie MA. Morality for the medical-industrial complex: A code of ethics for the mass marketing of health care. New Engl J Med. 1988;319(16):1086–1089.
48.
Childress JF. The place of autonomy in bioethics. Hastings Cent Rep. 1990;20(1):12–17.
49.
Thomasma DC. Philosophy of medicine in the USA. Theor Med. 1985;6(3):239–242.
50.
Thomasma DC, Pellegrino ED. Challenges for a philosophy of medicine of the future: A response to fellow
philosophers in the Netherlands. Theor Med. 1987;8(2):187–204.
57
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
51.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. The conflict between autonomy and beneficence in medical ethics: Proposal for
a resolution. J Contemp Health Law Policy. 1987;3:23–46.
52.
Nozick R. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books; 1974.
53.
Engelhardt HT Jr. The Foundations of Bioethics. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996.
54.
Kavanaugh JF. Partial truths. America. 1997;176(11):24.
55.
Loewy EH. Review: Beneficence in trust. Hastings Cent Rep. 1989;19(1):42–43.
56.
Humphrey D. Assisted Suicide: The Compassionate Crime. Los Angeles: The Society; 1982.
57.
Bergsma J, Thomasma DC. Autonomy and Clinical Medicine: Renewing the Health Professional Relation with the
Patient. Vol 2. In: Thomasma DC, Weisstub DN, Kushner TT, eds. International Library of Ethics, Law, and the New
Medicine. Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishing; 2000.
58.
Thomasma DC. Beyond autonomy to the person coping with illness. Camb Q Healthc Ethics. 1995;4(1):12–22.
59.
Retera G. Autonomie en kankerprocessen (Report: Autonomy and Cancer). Utrecht, The Netherlands: Report of
the Institute of Medical Psychology; 1986.
60.
Bergsma J. Doctors and Patients. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 1997.
61.
Thomasma DC. A contextual grid for medical ethics. In: Bruhn JG, Henderson G, eds. Values in Health Care:
Choices and Conflicts. Springfield, Ill: Charles C Thomas Publishers; 1991: 117–118.
62.
Loewy EH. Physicians, friendship, and moral strangers: An examination of a relationship. Camb Q Healthc
Ethics. 1994;3(1):52–59.
63.
McElhinney TK. Reflections on the humanities and medical education: Balancing history, theory, and practice.
In: Thomasma DC, Kissell J, eds, The Healthcare Professional as Friend and Healer. Washington DC: Georgetown
University Press; 2000: chap 22.
64.
Cable News Network-Europe. Special report. March 10, 1999.
65.
Loewy EH. Suffering and the Beneficent Community: Beyond Libertarianism. Albany, NY: SUNY Press; 1991.
66.
Loewy EH. Freedom and Community: The Ethics of Interdependence. Albany, NY: SUNY Press; 1993.
67.
Churchill LR. Why we need a theory of suffering and lots of other theories as well [commentary]. J Clin Ethics.
1991;2(2):95–97.
68.
Loewy EH. Advance directives: A question of autonomy. Camb Q Healthc Ethics. 1994;3(3):405–410.
69.
Brody H. The Healer’s Power. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press; 1992.
70.
Brock DW. The ideal of shared decision making between physicians and patients. Kennedy Inst Ethics J.
1991;1(1):28–47.
71.
Nelson HL. Against caring. J Clin Ethics. 1992;3(1):8–15.
72.
Gilligan C. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1982.
73.
Gould CC. New paradigms in professional ethics: Feminism, communitarianism, and democratic theory. Prof
Ethics. 1992;1(1–2):143–154.
58
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
74.
Cook RJ. Feminism and the four principles. In: Gillon R, ed. Principles of Health Care Ethics. New York: John
Wiley & Sons; 1994: 193–206.
75.
Gilligan C. Mapping the Moral Domain: A Contribution of Women’s Thinking to Psychological Theory and Education.
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1988.
76.
Noddings N. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. Berkeley: University of California Press;
1984.
77.
Callahan SC. In Good Conscience: Reason and Emotion in Moral Decision Making. San Francisco: Harper Collins;
1991.
78.
Flanagan OJ. Varieties of Moral Personality: Ethics and Psychological Realism. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1991.
79.
Loewy EH. Compassion, reason, and moral judgment. Camb Q Healthc Ethics. 1995;4(4):466–475.
80.
Jonsen AR, Toulmin S. The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral Reasoning. Berkeley: University of California
Press; 1988.
81.
Kopelman LM. Case method and casuistry: The problem of bias. Theor Med. 1994;15(1):21–37.
82.
Tomlinson T. Casuistry in medical ethics: Rehabilitated, or repeat offender? Theor Med. 1994;15(1):5–20.
83.
Wildes KW. The priesthood of bioethics and the return of casuistry. J Med Philos. 1993;18(1):33–49.
84.
Thomasma DC, Muraskas J, Marshall PA, Myers T, Tomich P, O’Neill JA Jr. The ethics of caring for conjoined
twins: The Lakeberg twins. Hastings Cent Rep. 1996;26(4):4–12.
85.
Jonsen AR, Siegler M, Winslade WJ. Clinical Ethics: A Practical Approach to Ethical Decisions in Clinical Medicine.
2nd ed. New York: Macmillan; 1986.
86.
Brody BA. Life and Death Decision Making. New York: Oxford University Press; 1988.
87.
Thomasma DC. Clinical ethics as medical hermeneutics. Theor Med. 1994;15(2):93–111.
88.
Anonymous. It’s getting harder to die if you don’t have a written plan. Natl Catholic Rep. April 2, 1999.
89.
Thomasma DC. Ethical aspects of geriatric care. In: Calkins E, Ford AB, Katz PR, eds. Practice of Geriatrics.
Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1992: 136–143.
90.
Junkerman C, Schiedermayer D. Practical Ethics for Students, Interns, and Residents: A Short Reference Manual.
Frederick, Md: University Publishing Group; 1994.
91.
Erde EL. Philosopher’s Corner. How abstract is my thinking as an ethicist in clinical settings? Camb Q Healthc
Ethics. 1994;3(2):281–288.
92.
Sheehan MN. Why doctors hate medical ethics. Camb Q Healthc Ethics. 1994:3(2):289–295.
93.
Glaser JW. Three Realms of Ethics: Individual, Institutional, Societal: Theoretical Model and Case Studies. Kansas
City, Mo: Sheed & Ward; 1994.
94.
Siegler M. Decision-making strategy for clinical-ethical problems in medicine. Arch Intern Med. 1982;142(12):2178–2179.
95.
Pellegrino ED. The anatomy of clinical-ethical judgments in perinatology and neonatology: A substantive and
procedural framework. In: Thomasma DC, Marshall PA, eds. Clinical Medical Ethics Cases and Readings. Lanham,
Md/New York: University Press of America; 1995: 109–118.
59
Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure
96.
Ahronheim JC, Moreno J, Zuckerman C. Ethics in Clinical Practice. Boston: Little Brown & Co; 1994.
97.
Thomasma DC. Training in medical ethics: An ethical workup. Forum Med. 1978;1(9):33–36.
98.
Thomasma DC. A philosophy of a clinically based medical ethics. J Med Ethics. 1980;6(4):190–196.
99.
Thomasma DC, Marshall PA. Clinical Medical Ethics Cases and Readings. Lanham, Md: University Press of America; 1995.
100.
Wagener R, Daniels L, Saulo M. Introductory Mediation Training: 6 Effective Steps for Successful Healthcare Conflict
Resolution. San Diego, Calif: The Center for Medical Ethics and Mediation; 1995.
101.
West MB, Gibson JM. Facilitating medical ethics case review: What ethics committees can learn from mediation
and facilitation techniques. Camb Q Healthc Ethics. 1992;1(1):63–74.
60
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
