199
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
Chapter 7
THE MILITARY AND ITS RELATIONSHIP
TO THE SOCIETY IT SERVES
NICHOLAS G. FOTION, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
THEORIES CONCERNING THE MILITARY–SOCIETY RELATIONSHIP
(Classic) and Extended Separatism
Paternalistic Separatism
Identicalism
Fusionism
ASSESSING THE MILITARY–SOCIETY RELATIONSHIP THEORIES
Is (Classic) Separatism Feasible in a Democracy?
Modern Democracies and Paternalistic Separatism
Can Identicalism Be Implemented?
Fusionism and the Future
CONCLUSION
*Professor, Department of Philosophy, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322; formerly, Fulbright Lecturer, Philosophy Department and
Medical School, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea; and Visiting Professor, Department of Philosophy and Fine Arts, US Air Force Academy,
Colorado Springs, Colorado
200
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Peter G. Varisano
Dry Goods
Florida, 1992
Master Sergeant Varisano (US Army, Retired) has depicted Army activities in the Persian Gulf and Somalia, as well as
this artwork showing relief efforts after Hurricane Andrew in Florida. Efforts such as these are indicative of the
relationship between the military and the society it serves, the focus of this chapter. Available at: http://
www.army.mil/cmh-pg/art/A&I/AVOP-0698.htm.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
201
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
INTRODUCTION
The question “What is the proper relationship
between the military and the rest of society?” has
always been of interest to those who seriously think
about war and the power inherent in the military.
Indeed, historically large but idle peacetime militaries have been seen as a threat to civilian governments. In the past, military establishments were generally allowed to wither soon after war ended. Should
new war threats develop, there always seemed to be
enough time to reinvigorate them. After World War
II, the emergence of communism as a global threat
changed the picture so that military establishments
came to be powerful not just during war but during
peacetime as well. Today, with the availability of a
wide variety of fast-strike weapons that take years to
develop, build, and deploy, the luxury of not having
a strong military in place during peace is no longer
affordable. Modern nations have to “come as you
are” to war. 1(p5) And if they are not “dressed” properly, they lose. It’s as simple as that.
So to be ready for modern war the military has
to be there in strength all the time. Thus, a large
part of the question about how the military and the
rest of society should deal with one another has to
do with the possibility that the military’s strength
can be aimed not only externally toward potential
and actual enemies but internally toward the society that sponsors it. The threat comes not just, or
even especially, from a direct military takeover, but
also from the tendency the military has to control
politics, industry, and even society as a whole in
both subtle and not so subtle ways.
THEORIES CONCERNING THE MILITARY–SOCIETY RELATIONSHIP
There are a number of ways to “manage” the
military so as to maximize its ability to defend the
country while minimizing its influence on civilian
affairs. These ways are explored in the discussions
of (Classic) and Extended Separatism (isolating the
military from the political sphere of the society it
serves), Paternalistic Separatism (isolating the military from society in general, but allowing the military leadership to explain military things to a civilian society that it might not otherwise understand),
Identicalism (making the military more like the society it serves through vastly increased interaction
between the two), and Fusionism (isolating the military in terms of maintaining military values while
at the same time increasing conversation and contact between the military and the general society),
which form the bulk of this chapter. Maintaining
the balance between military and civilian spheres
of interest is vital to the survival of any democracy.
If the scales tip too heavily to the military side, a
society is vulnerable to the forces within itself. But
if the scales tip too heavily to the civilian sphere,
opportunistic countries will take action. Thus examining these theories about the military–society
relationship is not an esoteric exercise for the philosophers among us. Rather it is a necessary requirement for any democracy that wishes to remain so.
The remainder of this chapter will first delineate
these four theories, then assess their feasibility in a
democracy. The discussion begins with Separatism,
which is parenthetically described as Classic to distinguish it from a later version.
(Classic) and Extended Separatism
Separatism is one theory about how to keep the
military under control, and at the same time make
certain it does its job properly. Traditionally, separatists believe that as an institution the military
should be isolated from the political sphere of the
society it serves, if for no other reason than that it
can then devote its full attention to its war-making
tasks. The last thing one should want is for the military to be distracted by having it heavily involved
with politics and with various social movements
and issues. 2(pp723–724) The issue of distraction aside,
separating the military from the political sphere
helps keep the latter from becoming militarized. By
letting civilians make social and political decisions,
and keeping the military busy preparing for and
fighting wars, the negative influences the military
might have on society are supposedly kept at a
minimum. Similarly, the negative influences of the
civilian sector interfering with strictly military activities might also be avoided.
Some of the dangers of letting the military play
important roles in social policy are expressed by
Jerome Slater in the following passage.
Thus, even if one wished to avoid the pejorative
connotations of the term “militarism,” it is evident
that as a general rule the military, naturally enough,
tend to place greater emphasis on military considerations relative to political ones in foreign policy
than do their civilian counterparts, and that this
structural bias substantially influences policy out202
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
comes, given the military’s control over much of
the information and intelligence that form the basis of policy, the extent of the institutionalized participation of the armed forces in the policy-making process within the executive branch, and the
weight their presumed expertise has given their
views with presidents, Congress, and public
opinion. 3(p753)
There are other dangers that separatists maintain
their theory avoids. Suppose, more or less, that the
US military had become associated with one of the
major political parties. Further suppose that as a
result high-ranking officers regularly spoke to political rallies, made other public statements, and
openly gave money on behalf of their favorite party.
Although the military would flourish during those
years when its party was in power, things would
be different when the opposition party took over.
What was a feast could easily become a famine. But
such ups and downs, the argument continues, are
neither good for the military nor the nation it serves.
Therefore, it is better for the military to maintain
strict neutrality when it comes to party politics.
According to this separatist doctrine, individuals
in the military could still express their preferences
in the privacy of their home, amongst friends, and
in the polling booth but, as a matter of policy, they
should not express these preferences in a public
forum.
A related argument gives us the next major reason in favor of separatism, that is, that military folk
are not, by and large, trained at playing the political game, especially on the level of making highpolicy decisions. Reichart and Sturm speak to this
point in their characterization of separatist thinking.
Normal career patterns do not look towards such a
role; rather, they are—and should be—designed to
prepare officers for competent command of forces
in combat or at least for the performance of the
complex subsidiary tasks that such command requires. Half-hearted attempts at irregular intervals
in an officer’s career to introduce him to questions
of international politics produce only superficiality and presumption and an altogether deficient
sense of the real complexity of the problems facing
the nation. It may be true that experience in helping to make policy would enhance an officer’s appreciation of such problems, but the costs and perils of such an education are too great. 2(p724)
Huntington, in his famous The Soldier and the
State, summarizes many of these separatist thoughts
as follows.
Politics deals with the goals of state policy. Competence in this field consists in having a broad
awareness of the elements and interests entering
into a decision and in possessing the legitimate
authority to make such a decision. Politics is beyond the scope of military competence, and the
participation of military officers in politics undermines their professionalism, curtailing their professional competence, dividing the profession
against itself, and substituting extraneous values
for professional values. The military officer must
remain neutral politically. “The military commander must never allow his military judgment to
be warped by political expediency.”4 The area of
military science is subordinate to, and yet independent of, the area of politics. Just as war serves the
ends of politics, the military profession serves the
ends of the state. Yet the state must recognize the
integrity of the profession and its subject matter.
The military has the right to expect political guidance from the statesman. Civilian control exists
when there is this proper subordination of an autonomous profession to the ends of policy. 5(pp71–72)
Before articulating the last major reason in support of separatism, it is useful to speak of the extended version of that position. The position described so far can be called narrow (or classic) separatism. The extended version, in contrast, speaks
not just to the military’s relationship to the political sphere but to the society as a whole. Extended
separatism is more an “ideal” or possible position
rather than one that many people hold in all its
parts. Still, it is important to articulate what the
“ideal” is so as to appreciate certain variations from
that ideal that are actually held by some people.
Roughly speaking, extended separatism says that
for a variety of reasons the military as an institution needs to separate itself in certain ways not just
from the society’s political institutions but from all
(or most) of its institutions. Consider the following:
business/industry, the mass media, law, medicine,
academia, religion, and labor. Extended separatism
argues for two strategies in dealing with almost all
of these institutions. The first is to keep them at
arm’s length from the military. Recognizing that
complete separation is impossible, separatists argue for doing the best we can to keep the points of
contact between these institutions and the military
at a minimum. The second is to practice a policy of
convergence. 6 With this policy the military learns
to perform many civilian tasks (eg, bookkeeping,
medicine, computer repairs). There is convergence
here because both the civilian and the military sectors perform these same tasks. 7 But there is also
separatism because once the military masters these
tasks, it performs them independently of those who
203
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
perform them in the civilian sector. It does them on
its own.
Consider in particular how extended separatists
in the military might view what the proper relationship should be between the military on the one side
and business and industry on the other. From the
military’s perspective what goes on in business and
industry is “foreign affairs.” The emphasis in these
institutions is not on serving the community although
the rhetoric might indicate otherwise (“We are here
to serve you” as salespeople often say). Rather, it is
on the bottom line, and on the individual. Individuals go into business for themselves to make money,
gain power, and perhaps fame. To gain these ends
business people must exhibit virtues that to some
extent overlap those found in the military. They must
be diligent, have perseverance, be knowledgeable,
flexible, and imaginative. But the goals of the two institutions, business and industry on the one side and
the military on the other, are so different that in reality they generate two different clusters of virtues.
Consider a list of military virtues that focuses on
just those that business/industrial institutions give
only lip service to at best: bravery, loyalty, obedience, cooperation, willingness to sacrifice for the
benefit for the group, and honesty.
From the point of view of separatist thinking
these differences in ethical outlook suggest the final reason for justifying this position. The argument
behind that reason goes like this. It is difficult to
inculcate military personnel with the cluster of virtues associated with military activity. Constant attention is required so that these virtues (ie, habits
of appropriate behavior and attitude) become internalized by military personnel. More than that, it
is necessary that personnel be placed in an environment that supports and encourages proper
moral development. Given that the society as a
whole, and the institutions of business and industry in particular, do not give strong support to the
military virtues, and indeed may directly and indirectly undermine or corrupt many of them, it is best
to segregate military personnel from the rest of the
society as much as possible. 8
This same argument applies to contact with some
of the other institutions in the society, such as
academia. The virtues encouraged within academia
may very well be noble in their own way, but they
are quite different from those found in the military.
Courage, loyalty, and obedience do not have the
status of primary virtues in academia as they do in
the military. On the other side the primary academic
virtues of diversity, curiosity, and independence do
not receive “star” status in the military. Academia
may not “corrupt” those in the military the way
perhaps business and industry sometimes do, but
it surely distracts them by discouraging the development of such virtues as loyalty and obedience. It
is, of course, impossible to segregate the military
completely from academia and the rest of society.
But, according to separatist doctrine, a significant
amount of such segregation is certainly necessary
if military personnel are to stay in focus.
So separatism, especially in its extended version,
would approve of those organizational systems and
practices that would keep military personnel on all
levels separated from the rest of society. Toward its
separatist ends it would thus approve of convergence in the form of billeting personnel on base
rather than in the community, isolating military
personnel on base when they serve overseas, and
also having the military develop its own schools,
playgrounds, churches, hospitals, shopping facilities, etc. It would encourage the military to do whatever it can to make those in the military feel as if
they belong to a tight, narrowly focused military
community. 7(p55)
Many of these classic and extended separatist
thoughts can be made concrete by imagining that
we have access to the musings of an archetypical
separatist senior officer. Let us call this imaginative
exercise a candid self-portrait because we are to
suppose this officer is simply privately reflecting
on his views without any concern about what others might think. It is as if he is simply letting his
thoughts wander in a free-association exercise. We
will call our fictional officer General Separon. These
then are the General’s thoughts:
Sherman was right when he spoke after the Civil
War about Washington being the center of intrigue,
gossip and slander9 and that we ought to keep aloof
from that kind of stuff. We don’t know how to play
the political game well. But more than that, playing it distracts us from what we are supposed to
do. Besides, if politicians see us trying to influence
them, they will turn around and think that they can
influence us in how to run wars. Scheming politicians should stick to their knitting; we should stick
to ours. Actually we ought not to get too close to
the rest of society either. Others go to work everyday to make ends meet or to get rich. Either way
they are thinking mainly about themselves. We in
the military are different. We have an important
mission to perform. We have to train so that when
a war starts we are ready to fight as a team for the
good of society. We can’t afford to be too much like
them—to get soft and self-indulgent. If we do that,
we’ll be dead and our mission will not get accomplished.
204
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Paternalistic Separatism
We will return to the separatist position in due
time in order to assess it. For now we turn to the
second theory that attempts to tell us how the military and the society should relate to one another. It
is difficult to know what to call this theory in part
because it is not one that many people openly proclaim as their own. It could be called paternalistic
separatism or perhaps manipulative separatism.
Rather arbitrarily, it will here be labeled paternalistic separatism.
This theory differs from narrow or extended
separatism by arguing that the modern military
cannot avoid at least some significant contact with
the various institutions in the society. Yet it goes on
to argue in typical separatist ways that it is still important to keep the military separated from the rest
of society as much as possible.
But how can the military be in significant contact with the rest of society and at the same time be
separated from it? The version of paternalistic separatism most compatible with the American society
does it as follows. It grants, at least officially, that
the military is subservient to the will of the society—in particular the will of those elected officials
who Constitutionally direct the military. Yet it says
that the military has an understanding of military
matters that others in a liberal society are not likely
to have.
This means that military leadership has a duty
to explain to the society such things as the need for
a new weapon system or the essence of a serious
threat posed by a potential enemy. Further, those
in military leadership roles must explain things in
ways that will convince the society of the truths
understood by the military—but not necessarily understood well by those who do not deal
with military matters on a daily and professional
basis.
Of necessity these explanations cannot always be
“objective.” Indeed, they will tend to be more persuasive or even propagandistic. An example of this
way of communicating with those in government
and the society at large during the Cold War was
an annual Pentagon publication titled Soviet Military Power10 (published from 1981 through 1988).
These publications consistently portrayed Soviet
military power (eg, the quality and number of its
missiles, airplanes, submarines, surface ships,
tanks, artillery, and so forth) in a “worst case scenario” setting. In fact, they seemed to go beyond
such a portrayal insofar as they contained numerous inaccuracies. 11
Even so, according to the paternalistic separatist
theory, the persuasive nature of these and other
documents, and still other presentations made by
the military, is still appropriate because it always
claims to have the interest of the society at heart.
What paternalism literally means, after all, is that
the father (the military) should care for the needs
of his children (the people). According to this doctrine, then, so long as the military has the society’s
interest at heart, not its own, it is doing its duty in
taking the steps necessary to persuade the government leaders to make the “right” decisions.
Other activities of the military also fall into the
paternalistic mold. For example, “black (ie, secret)
budget” buying of military equipment serves two
purposes. It keeps potential enemies from knowing what the United States is doing in the way of
future weapon systems. But it also protects the military from premature criticism at home for creating
highly controversial but, possibly very useful, military equipment. So the military chooses to prevent
the free flow of information for the “good of the
nation.”
Of course those who do this shielding do not represent the whole of the military. Largely this paternalistic task is left to certain political and business
oriented higher ranking officers—a military elite.
According to paternalistic separatism this leaves the
rest of the military establishment in position to take
a classic separatist stance. So the overall paternalistic separatist position is one that realistically allows, and even encourages, some interaction with
the rest of society. Still, it keeps these interactive
relationships limited to the few; and keeps these
relationships at arm’s length by the paternalistic
stance inherent in the position. That is, those who
come into contact with the outside are urged to do
so with a certain attitude that supposedly keeps
them from getting too close to those with whom
they are interacting.
It is as if the private thoughts of General Paterson, who is our fictional archetypical advocate of
paternalistic separatism, run along the following
path. Notice how his thoughts overlap Separon’s
only up to a point.
We military leaders are trying as best we can to
ensure the military institution does not become soft
and liberal like the rest of the society. That kind of
life might be good for the majority. But the military can’t afford to live that way. We have our own
separate military ethic or way of life to sustain.
Without it we would not be ready to fight when
war starts. Still, a few of us, certain key members
of the military elite, must unfortunately interact
205
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
with society. But these contacts should be made
only up to a point by the elite few; and only in certain ways. In particular our contacts will be paternalistic in nature so that, if necessary, we will tell
benevolent lies to the society for its own good. By
doing so we serve the military by protecting the
rest of that establishment from the society’s ‘corrupting’ influences. We act like buffers that keep
them and us apart. Our carefully nuanced dealings
with the society at large free the rest of the military establishment to do its own thing—to do its
duty of protecting the society from outside aggression.
Identicalism
On a continuum of the amount of interaction
permitted or encouraged, paternalistic separatism,
although basically a separatist doctrine, permits
more interaction than classic separatism. Before
discussing fusionism, the next theory on the continuum, it is useful to discuss identicalism, a theory
even more radically interactionist than fusionism.
Identicalism is a theory that few if any thinkers
within the military are very fond of, but one that
needs to be discussed in order to help us better
understand fusionism. That is, fusionism is better
understood when it is viewed as bracketed by paternalistic separatism on the one side and identicalism
on the other.
Identicalism starts with the general insight that
we tend to be suspicious of whatever is different
from us. If some foreigners move into the neighborhood we tend to keep them at arm’s length until we see just how weird they are measured against
standards with which we are familiar. If these foreigners are different and actually take pride in their
differences, our suspicions about them tend to increase. It seems, at least for some, that is how it is
with the military. Those in the military show they
are different in how they speak about themselves,
the language they use, the way they dress, the way
they behave, the work they do, and even in terms
of where they live. It is no wonder that as an institution the military has an uneasy relationship with
the rest of society—an uneasy relationship that becomes evident especially when some military scandal surfaces in the media.
Identicalism aims to change this relationship by
making the military more like the society it serves.
It can do this by making the society more like the
military (eg, as in Sparta) or the military more like
the society. Huntington seemed to have the former
option in mind in 1957 when he published The Soldier and the State. At that time he thought he saw a
conservative trend emerging from various influences in our society.
All these disparate developments hardly made up
a coherent intellectual movement. Nonetheless,
they were signs of a reexamination of American
society and American values from a more conservative viewpoint. Their significance for civil–military relations was that in due course they might
result in widespread acceptance by Americans of
values more like those of the military ethics. Present
in virtually all the strands of the new conservatism
were a stress on the limitations of man, an acceptance of institutions as they were, a critique of
utopianism and ‘solutionism,’ and a new respect
for history and society as against progress and the
individual. 5(pp458–459)
Although Huntington evidently hoped and
thought two or so generations ago that a new conservatism would emerge by the end of the 20th century, his hopes were never realized. It is true that in
the 1980s and 1990s there was a reemergence of conservatism focused on an increased sense of family
values, a lesser dependence on governmental assistance, and to some extent increased sensitivity
to group as against individual values. But there is
little to suggest in this renewed trend to conservatism that the society as a whole is giving up on individualism as it manifests itself in the demand for
individual rights, career options for the individual,
and a sense of the importance of individual identity. It seems, therefore, that although identicalism
could in theory become a reality by making the society more like the military, it is more likely to be
realized the other way around.
What might the military-joins-the-society version
of identicalism look like? And what arguments are
there in favor of this theory? This version of identicalism argues that the military fools itself when it
insists that it needs a separate “corporate” ethic in
order to allow it to function effectively as a military institution. To be sure, some virtues such as
courage, loyalty, and obedience need to be emphasized more when people perform military tasks as
against when they perform civilian ones. But,
identicalism argues, ordinary citizens can be taught
these virtues when they join the military without
forcing them to change their whole sense of personal identity. That is, they can become effective in
doing their work within the military context without foregoing their identity as free citizens of the
society. They can serve in the military much as other
citizens do when they perform everyday civilian
tasks.
206
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
According to identicalism, then, what the military should strive for is to make military personnel
no different in their outlook toward themselves (and
in the outlook people have toward them) from those
working for IBM (International Business Machines),
General Motors, Prudential, a local grocery store,
or for themselves. Indeed, the argument continues,
modern “warriors” perform many engineering,
computer, electronic, and other tasks that are quite
similar to those performed by their civilian counterparts. The jobs an increasing number of military
personnel perform are less uniquely militarily professional and more occupational in nature than they
were in the past. 12 As the military “tail” (of occupational professionals) grows longer, and fewer and
fewer “warriors” actually perform warrior roles,
there is less and less reason to pretend that the military needs to be separated from the rest of society
to get its various missions performed properly.
In general, then, identicalism encourages vastly
increased interaction between the military and the
rest of society when compared to the past. This
means favoring such policies as having military
personnel live off base, having children of military
personnel go to public schools, making many military bases more accessible to the public than they
are now, sending more military personnel to schools
and universities outside the military (even to the
point of closing down the military academies), being more open with the mass media, enlarging and
improving the reserves (because they have a closer
connection to the society than do regular military
units),13 hiring still more civilians to do work on
military bases, and so on. It also means involving
the military in nontraditional community tasks such
as interdicting drugs, building roads, fighting fires,
restoring wetlands, and controlling inner-city
crime. 14(p146) In this spirit, Eitelberg comments:
Indeed, the political advantages of using the military as an agent of social change are clear; if advocates of a larger force can claim that it is a benefit
to society, that dollars spent on the military can
equally satisfy social needs, they are better equipped
to stave off some of the budget cuts. 14(p145)
According to identicalism, the end result of all
these policies is that the society will come to understand, and be more sympathetic with, the military than it is now. The society will see, through
familiarity, what the military is up to and thus have
a decreased tendency to be suspicious of its intent.
A bonus for the military in this regard is that recruiting qualified personnel will be easier. By
changing military life so that it is more like civilian
life, more young people will likely be attracted to
the military. Other kinds of identicalist changes that
might be brought about include not mandating the
wearing of uniforms in those settings where military personnel perform noncombat related jobs and
not mandating the endlessly repetitive ritual of saluting.
The archetypical officer for identicalism is General Iden. Here are his thoughts:
My idiot fellow officers don’t realize how things
have changed even since Vietnam. They still don’t
realize the extent to which the military has to have
the approval of the society to operate effectively.
Those elitist idiots don’t realize how they encourage alienation between the military and the society by isolating one from the other. If we want to
be accepted by the society we serve, we can’t afford to be seen as a nation within a nation. We need
to maximize interaction between us and them. Besides, we gain more with interaction by tapping the
skills and resources of the society to help us accomplish our mission. Of course we have to wear uniforms in battle just as doctors have to wear their
white uniforms while they do their work. But it is
just stupid to make a big deal with uniforms when
we are not fighting or training to fight. The main
thing it does is tell the rest of society how different
we are from them. It is equally stupid to isolate the
military geographically in camps and bases. That
is what really encourages people to think that we
are keeping secrets about how we are spending
their money. Yes, some military secrets might get
out to a potential enemy if we were more open to
our own society; but secrecy harms us more than it
helps an enemy. It does so because with lots of secrecy the right hand often doesn’t know what the
left hand is doing. Too bad my views about the
military aren’t shared by anybody I know in the
military.
Fusionism
As mentioned already, fusionism falls between
identicalism and paternalistic separatism. Fusionism is not identicalism because it insists on maintaining a distinct identity for the military from the
rest of society. This theory argues that the military
needs to maintain its own ethical ideals and traditions; and needs to be separated at least to a certain
degree from the rest of society. 15 Yet fusionism is
different from both forms of separatism in that it
also argues for stronger connections between the
military and the society than do separatists. 16
These connections are stronger, and thus represent points of fusion, because they are what philosophers call conversational in nature. 17 These con207
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
versational connections are between individuals or
groups who, when they discuss things with one
another, do so in a free and open manner—where
being open means that neither side engages in systematic deception either by means of lies, exaggeration, distortion, and withholding information, or by
deliberately using vague, ambiguous, or otherwise
deceptive language. 17(pp26–27) In this regard, an advocate of fusionism would have little sympathy
with paternalistic separatism where the linguistic
exchange is one-sided because, under that doctrine,
the military endeavors to manipulate language
rather than use it to foster genuine communication.
One implication of fusionism with respect to the
military’s relations with the government is that
there will be fewer military secrets. Fusionism favors letting the society as a whole know more about
the activities of the military so that the excuse of
“military secrecy” is not used to hide errors and
corruption. Examples of such public knowledge
include published articles discussing military misdeeds such as the Air Force spending $200,000 to
fly a general home to his new assignment,18 the
cover-up of the massacre of civilians at My Lai during the Vietnam War,19 discussions of experimentation during the Cold War,20 and the Tailhook scandal
involving naval aviators’ misbehavior in a civilian
hotel. 21
When some secrecy is needed, fusionism argues
that at least some of the society’s objectively minded
elected representatives be “in on” the secrets. An
example of this point was the movement of weapons-grade nuclear material from a former Soviet
republic to the United States for proper disposal,
as described in an article in the New York Times. 22 It
is clear that secrecy was justified in this case because the material had to be moved without the
knowledge of terrorist groups that might have
wished to seize it. As it is described in the Times
report, however, it is not clear whether enough
elected officials were notified about the movement
of the nuclear fuel to satisfy fusionist thinking.
Thus, in this sense, fusionism opposes those military secrets where only the military knows about
them; or, aside from the military, only co-opted outsiders are in the know.
The idea behind this concern for openness within
the doctrine of fusionism can be understood best
through an analogy to medicine. Medicine, like
military activity, is service oriented. 23 According to
the ideal, medicine as a discipline is not in place to
serve physicians, but to serve patients—where serving patients means acting in their best interest first
and foremost. But to do this, physicians need to
carefully consult with their patients because in a
real sense patients know best what they want. 24 Of
course, physicians know many things, too. Mainly
they are experts concerned with what means are
needed in order to arrive at some end. Given that
for most patients the end they desire is health, physicians are good at telling people what means they
should adopt to achieve that end. But physicians
are not specialists about ends. They are not specialists about the sense of health that patients want, or
whether patients are even concerned about health
at all when they happen to be in a state of great and
permanent distress. About ends, then, patients are
in the best position to know what is right for them.
Given this insight, it is important for physicians to
listen to their patients and allow them to make their
own decisions (about ends and even to some extent about means). But to do that, physicians need
to give their patients information so that their decisions are as rational as they can be. To the extent
that physicians hold back information, lie to them,
or deceive them in some other way, patients cannot
make decisions about their ends because they are
not fully informed. 25
By analogy, if we see the military as a service institution it would be just as important for it to fully
inform the society (ie, its patient) so that the society can make rational decisions about how it can
best be served. Morris Janowitz expresses the same
thought as follows.
[T]he problems of civilian control consist of a variety of managerial and political tasks. As a requisite for adequate civilian control, the legislature and
the executive must have at their disposal both criteria and information for judging the state of readiness and effectiveness of the military establishment
in its constabulary role. 26(p420)
According to fusionism, then, paternalistic separatism advocates policies like those that physicians
held to a generation ago when the phrase “doctor
knows best” was popular—a phrase that suggests
that physicians are specialists not only about means
but also about ends. Fusionism would go on to argue that insofar as paternalistic separatism argues
for a policy that comes down to “the military knows
best,” it is advocating policies that come dangerously close to subverting the democratic ideals of a
society such as the United States.
Fusionism’s basic stance can be extended to apply to the military’s relationships with the rest of
society. For fusionism, modern military activity is
far too related to technological development for
classic or paternalistic separatism to make any sense
208
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
when, for example, the military has to deal with
business or industry. But beyond having regular
contact with business and industry, in particular its
production facilities and research talents, the military has to be careful not to make its contacts with
these institutions too narrow. Just as it would not
do for the military to focus on giving its information about its activities just to certain “co-opted”
political figures, so its contact with business and
industry should not be just with certain favored
(“co-opted”) businesses. Rather, the avenues of contact need to be broad, probably much broader than
they are at present. 27(p205)
In this connection, consider the distinction between product and process technologies. The
former refers to technologies that produce new
fighter planes, radar systems, missiles, and the like;
the latter to technologies concerned with how to
produce higher-quality products in greater numbers
and at less cost. 27(p205)
It must be emphasized here that the Department
of Defense has traditionally devoted all of its R&D
[research and development] resources to product
technologies and product development activities.
In fact, it is only possible to specifically identify
about 1 percent of the over $35 billion of defense
R&D that are devoted to process technologies—
geared toward cost and schedule reductions. These
are the manufacturing technology programs, which
run between $200 and $300 million a year. By contrast, world-class corporations in the United States
spend something like one-third of their total R&D
dollars on process technologies, and Japanese
world-class firms tend to spend approximately
two-thirds of their total R&D dollars on process
technologies. 27(p205)
But there is change in the air that an enthusiastic
fusionist would approve of. In designing its new
attack submarine28 and its next generation destroyer
(DD-21)29 the US Navy is taking process as well as
product into account. How these ships are built and
the costs of building them are taken into account
even in the design of these ships. This means that
from the start, those in charge of these programs
will, if necessary, reach out beyond the military (ie,
resort to outsourcing) to find workers, managers,
equipment, and facilities to prepare these ships for
war. 30 All of the services are doing, or at least trying to do, the same, that is, they are engaging in a
process that is often labeled Total Quality Management (TQM). 31 By their very nature, TQM and its
variants are processes that urge everyone involved
in producing some product or engaged in some activity to look constantly and everywhere for the best
way of doing things.
Fusionism’s attitude toward academia is similarly open-ended. It argues that when academia is
approached by the military on a we-can-learn-fromeach-other basis, things go better than they do when
the military tries, defensively, to hide all its little
and large warts. 3(p754) Indeed, in this spirit the Air
Force, Army, and Navy have a long-standing tradition of sending officers to graduate school at major
universities. All of these services also invite civilian faculty to teach at their military academies.
Similarly, fusionism argues for openness with
respect to the mass media. Fusionists grant that it
is not so easy to make a convincing case for openness here because the media are famous for their
“feeding frenzy” when it comes to telling the public about misdeeds and illegalities.
The electronic media, and particularly television,
cause another problem. We can call it the CNN
(Cable News Network) paradox. The paradox
works like this. Television crews from CNN and
other television networks visit a scene of human
suffering such as a war or nationwide starvation.
The suffering is portrayed so vividly by television
cameras that a demand arises from the viewing
audience that something be done. The demand for
a solution is so insistent that eventually military
forces are inserted. Unfortunately, the military
forces almost always suffer casualties sooner or later
and, of course, the cameras dutifully and vividly
give us reports about these ugly events. Now the
loud-and-clear cry to “Bring the boys home” is
heard. So the paradox is that the television camera
both encourages decision makers to put military
forces at risk and, yet, well before these forces have
time to deal with the problems they have come to
deal with, encourages them to get out.
In spite of these and other mass media problems,
fusionism insists that given the kind of society in
which we live, the mass media represent some of
the primary ways the society has of informing itself about what the military is doing. Without the
media in place, the society at large would simply
not be in such a good position to give its consent to
what the military should and should not be doing.
Here is how Robert Trice expresses some of these
and other related thoughts about the relationship
between the military and the mass media.
They [the mass media] serve as the primary link
between the Government and the American people
by providing information from government
decisionmakers to the public and feedback from the
209
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
public to policymakers. The mass media are the
primary source of information for the professionals about world happenings. The media can support governmental actions by providing favorable
analysis and explanations of complex situations
and decisions. The media can play the role of adversary to the government by questioning the wisdom or motivation behind policy decisions. In their
adversary role, they are most likely to have an observable effect on national security policy.
The media can exert significant nongovernmental
influence through the ability to conduct and publicize independent investigations that can trigger
more powerful actors like the President or Congress
into action. For example, Seymour Hersch’s investigation of My Lai, Joseph Treaster’s stories on Dr.
Frank Olson’s fatal overdoes of LSD [lysergic acid
diethylamide] given by the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and the special cover-up on the
“Selling of the Pentagon” [ie, engaging in public
relations] set in motion processes that brought the
behavior of professionals under close scrutiny. 32(p507)
Given these thoughts, fusionists argue that it is
up to the military to play its cards in the open,
thereby keeping the society as fully informed as is
possible. It is also up to the military to learn to roll
with the punches when it receives criticism.
The first half of the fusionist doctrine, thus, argues for the military to generate and sustain open,
broad, and close connections with a variety of institutions. Insofar as it does this, it makes itself different from all forms of separatism. The second half
of this doctrine shows itself to be different from
identicalism in that in spite of the fusion of the military with the various societal institutions, a certain
amount of separatism is necessary. It argues that
those in the military represent diverse groups. Some
can be soldier statesmen, others businesslike in their
thinking and actions, and still others more academic
in their orientation. These people are the ones
whose duty it is to fuse the military to one or another part of the society. But diversity in the military is such that there are others whose duties have
nothing to do with fusing. Their duties are related
to the traditional military fighting roles. According
to fusionism, then, the military can both have and
eat its cake. Thus, there is room within the military
for some to focus their attention on fusing, while
others focus on fighting. It is only a prejudice of
past thinking to suppose that the whole of the military must devote itself to the ethics of its fighting
traditions or be corrupted by outside influences.
General Fution represents the archetypical
fusionist officer in our imaginative exercises. Here
is how his thoughts run.
My job in the military is to facilitate communication with the President, his advisers and Congress.
I’ve found that if I am open and honest with those
I deal with, I get along better in the long run. Hey,
it’s the same for me when I try to handle problems
I have at home—with my wife and kids. Sometimes
it’s difficult to tell the truth but if I lie to them, it’s
worse later—when I get caught. And that’s the
truth. Because I tell the truth—well most of the time
anyway—I’m nobody’s “yes” man. If the President
says something pertaining to military matters and
I think what he says is wrong, I tell him so. If he
doesn’t like hearing “No,” he can fire me. So far
I’m still in business. And part of being in business
is helping those in the military who are better at
fighting wars than I am—and who aren’t so good
at dealing with Presidents as I am. It is my job to
look after their interests and in so doing look after
the interests of the nation.
ASSESSING THE MILITARY–SOCIETY RELATIONSHIP THEORIES
With the descriptive account of the four theories
about how the society and the military should relate to one another in place, it is time to assess each
theory to see if one can be picked as better than the
others. Because the descriptive accounts generally
emphasized the strengths of each theory, the assessments will focus on their weaknesses.
Is (Classic) Separatism Feasible in a Democracy?
The inspiration for separatism is reflected in General Separon’s thought that the military needs a
cocoon in which it can safely generate its own special way of life. Such a cocoon supposedly is needed
especially in liberal societies where the regimented
life in the military contrasts starkly with life on the
outside. Inside the group, discipline and sacrifice
are important; while outside, individual freedom
and indulgence seem to be the order of the day.
Because separatism in one form or another is
a doctrine found in three of the four theories under discussion (all except identicalism), it has
some degree of plausibility to it. However, both
classic and extended separatism, that is, separatism in its pure form, suffer from three serious flaws.
Two of them are closely related and can be thought
of as flaws of practicality. The third is more theoretical.
210
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
The first practical flaw manifests itself as the result of technological change. There was probably a
time in the 19th century when the military in many
Western nations became professionalized, and when
those military organizations could have been
“separated.”33(p106) In that century, technology was
beginning to move forward at an accelerating pace,
but the pace was not yet very rapid. As a result,
contact with “the outside world” could be kept at a
minimum. At that time, military organizations
could assign the very few to buy the small arms,
the cannon, ammunition, food, and clothing for the
very many. The many could, as a result, live inside
the military establishment in splendid isolation. But
today, with modern technology advancing so rapidly, the military has to spend more time and effort
determining whether what it buys is what it needs.
But beyond that, more contact with the outside
world is required to assess and service the equipment and supplies sent to the military. So modern
technology ties the military to the society in such a
way that it is impossible for separatism to work in
quite the way it is sometimes envisioned by proponents of that doctrine. 27
The second practical flaw making it difficult to
implement separatism is that the society itself has
changed. In part, the change is also directly the result of technology. Modern communication and
travel make it far more difficult for the military to
isolate itself as compared to even the amount of isolation possible during World War II. More than any
other technology, the portable camcorder has
brought about this change. It is there to record what
happens, both good and bad, as it happens or soon
after. Think here of how the Gulf War was covered
and how, since then, such events as the slaughters
in Somalia, Rwanda, and the former Yugoslavia
were covered.
However, the change is fed not only by technology but by the desire of the society to know what
its institutions are doing. The society far more today than in the recent past insists on accountability. It will not let physicians, lawyers, teachers, ministers, business leaders, and the military do their
work as if they were operating in a vacuum. None
of these institutions, but especially not the military
with its huge tax-funded budgets, is allowed to act
as it sees fit without explaining to the society what
it is doing. Both recent and past events now come
to light that would never have been reported in the
past. In this connection consider General Ashby’s
flight from Europe to the United States in an almost
empty C-141B that probably cost taxpayers between
$100,000. and $200,000. 18 Then there is the case of
the 10 Air Force reservists who “appropriated” another C-141 evidently not just for training purposes
but in order to attend two professional basketball
games. 34 Or consider the many immoral and secret
nuclear experiments done on soldiers early in the
Cold War that have now come to light. 20 So again,
for practical reasons, it is difficult to imagine how
the military can operate in an exclusive or almost
exclusive separatist manner, especially in a society
like ours that prides itself on its open democratic
manner of running the society. Separatism might
still be a doctrine that could operate in a dictatorship of the left or right. However, in a democratic
society like ours, it appears that such a doctrine is
just not in the cards.
But even if somehow the two practical flaws of
separatism could be overcome, the third flaw, the
more theoretical one, needs to be dealt with. Recall
once again that the advantage claimed for separatism is that it allows the military the social space it
needs to train its people both with respect to the
skills and the ethics of war. Let it be granted for the
moment that this claim is valid. Even so, the argument over the validity of separatism is not thereby
settled. What needs to be asked in addition is: What
are the costs of this doctrine?
Consider an analogy to business, one as recent
as the competition for sales of automobiles between
American and Japanese companies. It is generally
conceded that the Japanese manufacturers have for
years been driving the market. Before the Japanese
entered the American market, and for some years
after that, American car companies continued to
suffer from an isolationist mentality and thus continued to produce large and fairly low-quality automobiles. For a while they even made a good deal
of money producing these vehicles. But the competition from Japan, and for a time from Germany in
the form of the Volkswagen Beetle, caught up with
them. In the 1990s, with a less isolationist mentality, American car companies began making a comeback. Across the board, they produced new vehicles
that were fully competitive with those produced by
foreign companies. They even took the lead in the
production of new lines such as the minivan and
the sports utility vehicle.
The lesson is obvious. Isolation has its costs.
There might be some advantages to turning your
head inward, as self-reflection has its rewards. But
if Separon and his kind overdo it, they will likely
fail to learn from others about how to make and do
things right and, more generally, how to live well.
They will experience these failures in the form of
getting into habits that might have been appropri211
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
ate in the past, but are no longer so.
The same analogy works in academia. Quality
research and creative work in academia are rarely
the result of activity performed in isolation. While
there is always the case of the idiosyncratic genius
who surprises us with how much he or she accomplishes, most good academic work is public. Academic work, even that originally done in isolation,
is publicly assessed in the end by one’s peers in an
objective setting.
The argument here is that military activity also
needs the light of day to assess just how good or
bad it is, as Fitzgerald has detailed in his discussion of waste and fraud in defense spending, as well
as the “code of silence” that keeps embarrassing
secrets out of the public view. 35 This is probably
more so today with rapid changes in technology.
Nineteenth century separatism with technology
changing at a more leisurely pace might have made
some sense, but 20th and 21st century separatism
seems to make less sense, if classic separatism ever
made sense at all.
Modern Democracies and Paternalistic Separatism
Paternalistic separatism does not suffer from the
obvious isolationist disadvantages of classic separatism. General Paterson and his allies realize that
a certain amount of interaction is needed between
the military and the society. Unlike classic separatists, they feel that their thinking is thus fully compatible with the conditions found in the 20th and
21st century where the military cannot avoid interacting with many of the other societal institutions
on a regular basis. They also recognize that these
interactions have to be realistic. It won’t do, Paterson says, to interact with society in the idealistic
way argued for by fusionists. The military would
be rendered impotent if it were naively open in its
dealings with Congress, the mass media, and a wide
variety of institutionalized critics of the military
such as The Center for Defense Information (which
rather consistently argues for cuts in military spending far greater than Congress or recent presidents
would allow) and Concerned Philosophers for
Peace, a pacifist organization.
According to Paterson, then, the very way that
politicians and the mass media operate forces the
military to adopt persuasive strategies for dealing
with the society. That’s just the way the game is
played. So if the military adopts a paternalistic attitude toward the society by exaggerating and even
covering up a bit here and there, no one should really complain too much. In sum, those strategies
enable the military to deal as effectively as possible
with the society. At the same time, those strategies
enable the military to distance itself from the rest
of the society so that it can sustain an independent
ethic and a life style for dealing with war whenever it comes.
There are at least two flaws with this paternalistic separatist position. The first flaw derives from
the effects of playing the game the way other institutions in the society allegedly play it. Paterson and
his allies assume that their paternalistic strategies
will protect the military. If they are successful, these
strategies hide from everybody (the enemy as well
as the society the military serves) the existence,
numbers, and nature of military equipment. An
example of such a strategy, according to Boatman,36
was the Q Program, the development of a secret
plane, which never materialized because of high
costs and the end of the Cold War. These strategies
also hide all sorts of small blunders committed by
the military. All this hiding, the argument is, keeps
the military insulated from a wide variety of exaggerated criticism and thereby facilitates the proper
working of its paternalistic but also separatist ideology.
Thus the first flaw of paternalistic separatism
pertains to the side effects of these evasive strategies. The view of those who advocate this ideology
is that paternalism protects (separates) more than
it exposes. They claim that it does more good than
harm overall. But this assumption is highly questionable in part because the other institutions are
not so naive as to believe all or even most of the
stories the military tells. 35(pp1–6) It may not take the
mass media, academia, committees in the legislative branches, and other groups long to figure out
when the military is playing a not overly honest
paternalistic game. Even if much of what the military means to keep secret stays that way, uncovering some of what was deceptively covered can
prove costly. Once trust is lost, much of what the
military says is not likely to be believed. We have
already noted that the military as an institution
faces groups in the society that are negatively disposed to it. These groups do not need much incentive to trigger criticism of the military concerning
waste, corruption, the opportunity costs of military
spending, and the almost unstoppable power of the
military industrial complex. If, now, the military’s
paternalistically inspired errors are exposed, as they
are likely to be in these days where public awareness via television, computers, and radio is increasing, the paternalistic military may turn out to be its
own worst enemy.
212
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
It is true, of course, that the rest of society plays
games with communication. Those in business and
industry and those in politics, just to name two
groups, make it a practice of not always speaking
honestly and openly. They engage in what we might
say are less than ethical practices. Nonetheless,
these same people who do not set high standards
for themselves insist on setting high standards for
the military and other service institutions.
It is apparent, then, that the military cannot rely
on stealth policies to protect and isolate itself as
a service institution. Once its cheating practices
are uncovered, it will be the worse for it. It will
be seen as having erred twice—first by making
mistakes, second by trying to cover them up. The
blown cover-up will encourage politicians to get as
much political capital as possible from these mistakes. The cover-up will also encourage the mass
media to sensationalize the errors in order to sell
television and radio time, newspapers, and magazines. It seems then that contrary to paternalistic
separatist doctrine, it might be best as a rule for the
military to come clean right from the beginning. It
can be argued, at least, that coming clean is not
obviously so stupid an option as it might have
seemed at first.
The second flaw inherent in paternalistic separatism is also consequentialist in nature. The argument pointing to the first flaw is that, contrary to
paternalistic separatist doctrine, it may be that coming clean will in the long run serve the military and
the society best. Even in the dog-eat-dog arena of
politics and the mass media, it is better to simply
be caught making mistakes than be caught making
those mistakes and then caught covering them up
as well. The second argument now says that a direct consequence of the paternalistic separatist position is that it leads down a very slippery slope.
That slope is represented by the degenerate form
of this position. Up to now paternalistic separatism has been represented as a doctrine that looks
primarily at the society’s, and only secondarily at
the military’s, best interests. But surely, with all its
secrecy, it will not be easy to maintain paternalistic
separatism in its pure form. The secrecy is supposed
to be in place for the good of society. But the judges
of just what to keep secret will be largely the military leaders themselves. To make matters worse,
there will be few checks on their judgments because
they will control most of the information needed
for anyone to make sound rational decisions about
what the military should be doing. 3(p753) Given this
situation, even if we generously assume that these
leaders have the ability to identify just what is and
is not in the society’s best interest, it is difficult to
believe that only information that in fact is in the
society’s interest will be put in the large bin of “military secrets.” The temptation will be to put things
there that also have to do with corruption, personal
privilege, waste, various other forms of inefficiency,
stupidity, and so on.
A famous example of just this sort of corruption
is described by Headrace Smith in his book, The
Power Game. 37 It appears that in the early and middle
1980s the US Army was interested in developing,
buying, and deploying a division air defense system called DIVAD. Each of the hundreds of DIVAD
units that the US Army wanted to deploy eventually consisted of a tank chassis, multiple cannons,
and radar. DIVAD was supposed to defend tanks,
troops, and everything else in the field much better
than anything available at that time. Aside from
being very expensive, DIVAD didn’t work very
well. The guns didn’t have the range needed to deal
with modern airplanes and helicopters. Beyond that
DIVAD had trouble dealing effectively with targets
within its range—especially if they took evasive
action. However, the US Army’s test results did not
reflect these difficulties. Videotapes showed DIVAD
firing, and then seconds later “sitting duck” targets
exploding and falling from the sky. But it was not
DIVAD that was knocking down the targets. Rather,
it was the range safety officer who destroyed them
as DIVAD was firing. In short, many of the tests
were faked. Fortunately the US Army got caught.
“Moles” inside the Pentagon leaked information to
the press and eventually when DIVAD’s deficiencies and the cover-ups related to them were exposed
the whole project was cancelled.
The point of the DIVAD story and others like it
is that paternalistic separatism seems to be inherently degenerative. It is the kind of doctrine that in
its ideal form can be made to sound plausible; but
a kind that cannot easily, if at all, be practiced at or
near its ideal form. The power the doctrine of paternalistic separatism gives to the military to decide what is and is not good for the society reminds
us all of the cliché that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
Can Identicalism Be Implemented?
As we have seen, identicalism is the only major
doctrine concerned with the relationship between
the military and the society that gives up on all
forms of separatism. General Iden argues for a radi213
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
cal change in how the military is to be conceived.
Breaking with a long tradition, he proposes that
misunderstandings between the military and the
society it serves be ameliorated by making the military as much like the rest of society as possible. For
him, there will be fewer misunderstandings caused
by the military’s isolation, secrecy, being different,
and anything of the sort if the military follows his
doctrine.
However, one problem with identicalism is that
even the modern military, with all its contacts with
the society, cannot avoid a certain amount of isolation. In pure physical terms, large numbers of military personnel still need to be isolated from those
they serve simply because they serve overseas—either in some foreign land or on ships. Businesses of
course similarly send their personnel overseas but
they usually send individuals or small groups
rather than large units as the military does. So by
the nature of the work it does, a need remains for a
greater degree of isolation found in overseas military work than that found in the work of the
society’s other institutions.
But beyond that, military activity demands some
isolation even when military work is done at home.
Infantry, tank, artillery, and similar training in the
US Army demand that the work be done on tracts
of land isolated from the rest of society and not in
and around major cities. Similarly, various training
schedules in the US Air Force and in the US Navy
demand isolation. And the need for separating the
military from the society does not seem to be diminishing. If anything, intensive training with hightechnology equipment demands a certain kind of
mastery that takes great time and effort. It requires
as well a level of teamwork, among the specialists
in the fighting units, that again demands time and
effort.
The need for teamwork inherent in modern military organizations suggests another criticism of
identicalism. These units need large blocks of time
alone to bond together as a team. The bonding is
necessary given the nature of the dangerous work
military people do. The leaders and the members
of each unit need to know what each member of
the team can do, which members are interchangeable with one another when there are casualties in
battle, and how much trust they can place in one
another. Here is how Marlowe expresses it.
It [modern warfare] requires not only higher technology than that possessed by a prospective opponent, but also the ability to use that technology at
its maximum level of technical and tactical effectiveness. Additionally, it requires highly trained
and specialized support and service skills that will
enable extremely rapid theater buildup using a
combination of sea, air and land assets. It also requires that these actions be sustained for days or
weeks in the face of the extraordinary psycho-social and psycho-physiological stresses and demands of contemporary continuous operations (eg,
twenty-four-hour-a-day warfare). Overall, I believe
that these changes define a necessary alteration of
many of the US military’s past concepts of personnel sustainment. The continuous pipeline of ‘interchangeable parts’ replacements of World War II,
Korea and the Vietnam conflict and the personnel
management and utilization policies of past effective operations can no longer optimally sustain new
models of warfare in the 1990s. 8(p149)
If anything, it seems, modern war has enhanced
rather than diminished the need for at least a certain amount of isolation.
One concession might be made to identicalism.
When military personnel serve in a civilian setting,
as they do when they undertake a tour of duty at a
university, they might be, as in fact they are, allowed
to “go civilian.” They are more likely to successfully go about performing their academic mission
dressed like the sea of students they are working
with rather than sticking out conspicuously in
their uniform. However, a further concession to
identicalism seems to be out of order. It might be
thought that those military personnel who perform
civilian-like work in military settings (eg, computer
operators, mechanics, lawyers, physicians) should
also be allowed to “go civilian.” The argument
might be that these people have attachments to the
civilian side of their field or profession that are just
as valid as the attachments they have to the military. And, the argument might continue, no real
purpose is served by having them behave “like soldiers” when their work, as such, has nothing to do
with soldiering.
But surely one among many objections to such
an extension of the identicalist proposal is that it
would divide the military into two classes of
people—those who dress in uniform and act accordingly, and those who do not. Some in uniform would
resent the privileges the civilian-like military have,
and some on the civilian-like side would resent the
treatment they receive from their uniformed compatriots—who very likely would think of them as
not really being a part of the team. It is not difficult
to imagine all sorts of morale problems developing
214
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
from this dual approach to dress and behavior
among the military.
So if, in general, identicalism has some serious
objections to it, there seems to be no good reason for
conceding to the position even a partial victory. With
few exceptions, as when individual military personnel go to university or work in civilian laboratories
or factories, and in the process adopt the virtues of
these workplaces, the model of military behavior
that encourages military personnel to fully identify
with the society seems to represent an unfortunate
overreaction to classic and extended separatism.
Fusionism and the Future
As we have seen, as a fusionist, General Fution
tries to split the difference between paternalistic
separatism and identicalism. He does his best to
have the military, if not identify, then at least relate
with the rest of the society in an open and relatively
honest way so as to gain the society’s trust. Yet he
also argues for some separation. Without some
separation, Fution argues that the military cannot
build the teamwork necessary to carry out modern
military operations.
The main problem with fusionism is its seemingly absurd naiveté. The naiveté is associated more
with the activities of the military elite who deal with
the political, business, and industrial elites than
with the activities of those on the lower levels who
tend to do what we think of as traditional military
work. “Lower” types are the ones most separated
from the society. They have problems of their own
with credibility when it comes to reporting to their
superiors about levels of preparedness. “Yes,” the
captain tells his superior, “all our tanks are ready
for action” when in fact three of them are not quite
in working order. And the superior has a similar
problem when he writes a no-fault letter of recommendation for his not always perfect captain. But,
by and large, these middle and lower level types
do their work in ways that earn them respect from
the society. It is these people who, if the military
has a positive image within the society, have earned
it through hard work and dedication to duty.
It is the opposite with the military elite. Although
a few in this elite earn a great deal of respect and
honor for themselves and the military when they
successfully lead the military in battle,14(p144) the vast
majority garner suspicion and cynicism especially
when they are associated with the Pentagon and
other military power centers.
Even so, that elite is seen as leading a machine
so powerful that although it bends under social and
political stresses, it does not break. The machine
always manages to survive, so it seems, because the
elite play hardball rather than softball with the rest
of society. If the more idealistic softball game played
by Fution were adopted by those in charge of the
Pentagon, the military would be far less successful
than it has been up to now in playing Paterson’s
game. At least that is the argument of the paternalistic separatists against the fusionists.
Part of the idealism that would contribute to
harming the military and the society, they add, can
be laid directly at the feet of the fusionism theory
of communication. Recall that fusionism’s paradigm of how communication should work is something like an open and honest tête-à-tête between
two old friends. But clearly, paternalistic separatists say, that sort of relationship is not possible when
the military talks to Congress, the mass media, or
business and industry. Even if the military favored
these institutions with open and honest talk, the
favor would not likely be returned in kind. Each
of these institutions has its own reasons for being less than candid in the conversational exchange
with the military. Those in Congress need to get
reelected. So if they see an opportunity to gain votes
at the expense of the military, many, perhaps most,
would seize it. As to the mass media, their concern
is not with a normal conversation where there is an
exchange of information and ideas between two
parties. Rather, they are interested primarily in a
one-directional flow of information. They ask the
questions and the military is supposed to give the
answers. And, again, answers that hurt the military
are favored over those that help. Bad news sells
better than good. As to business and industry, the
military is for them a “money cow.” Conversations
between business and industry, on the one side, and
the military, on the other, will focus not on an honest and open exchange of ideas but on “milking”
the cow.
Fution then is not just naive. Insofar as he advocates a theory of what the relationship between the
military and the rest of society should be, he advocates a policy that apparently cannot be implemented. His position rests on an analogy of two
friends talking to one another when in fact the military has no friends to talk to. All its so-called friends
help the military when the military can help them.
But when helping the military hurts them, they will,
so the argument goes, turn their backs.
215
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
CONCLUSION
Which theory overall is most appropriate for a
liberal democratic society such as the United States?
(Table 7-1 summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of the four theories.) At best, (classic) and
extended separatism has been seen as a doctrine for
another time when there simply were fewer connections between the military and the rest of society. So there is no way that this doctrine in its pure
form can give an account of the need the modern
military has to create and sustain connections with
the rest of a society. Separatism also fails to realize
that there is a diversity of talent in the military that
allows some to engage in the separatist tasks of preparing for war, and yet allows others to pursue a
variety of nonseparatist tasks for the military. Finally, separatism is insensitive to the costs of isolationism. Separating oneself from others often leads
to a mind-set not open to changes in military thinking—changes that need to take place because of the
fast pace of modern technological development.
Separatism’s flaws are many and serious, and cannot easily be counterbalanced by the advantages of
the position. It thus needs to be rejected as a serious option for how the military and the society
should relate to one another.
For different reasons identicalism also needs to
be rejected. It does not take into account the
military’s continued need for some separation to
succeed in its training program and to give its military personnel a time and place to bond to one another. In its attempt to build a positive relationship
between the military and the society, it goes too far.
It assumes that this goal can be achieved only by
minimizing separation and by, in effect, asking the
military to lose its identity as an institution. Given
the serious nature of military work, that is too high
a price to pay.
So the choice is between paternalistic separatism
and fusionism. These two positions at least sense
that some combination of interaction and separation is needed to allow the military to best serve
the society. But which of the two does this the best?
Or perhaps, given the flaws of each, the question
should be: which is the least flawed?
In the end, one of paternalistic separatism’s flaws
is fatal. So it too has to be rejected. That flaw, it will
be recalled, is that position’s tendency to lapse into
a degenerate form. Of course each of the other positions has at least one degenerate form. Separatism can slide gradually into some kind of interactionism by allowing the military to become an
overly powerful state within a state. Identicalism,
in contrast, can degenerate into some kind of separatism when it discovers that it simply cannot sustain its doctrine in its pure form. Even fusionism
can suffer from backsliding when a few of its adherents gradually learn that you can successfully
deceive some of the people some of the time.
But paternalistic separatism’s tendency toward
degeneration is different. The mentality of those
who act in the spirit of this doctrine encourages
them to make decisions without consulting seriously with others. (An example is the behavior of
Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North and his cohorts in
the mid-1980s that resulted in the Iran-Contra scandal, in which the stated intentions of Congress were
circumvented because these individuals believed
that their cause was just and therefore they were
above the law.) For them, and others like them, authorization tends to be self-authorization. So there
will be fewer checks on their decisions to do what
is best for the society. There will be fewer checks
on them as well when many of them degeneratively
slide into acting not on the society’s behalf but on
their own; and in effect slide into corrupt practices.
So whereas the other positions can suffer from degeneration due mainly to a variety of human weaknesses, paternalistic separatism suffers due to human weaknesses and the deceptive nature of the
position itself.
A second fatal flaw of paternalistic separatism is
also related to degeneration. In fact the society has
not authorized the military to act in paternalistic
ways. The military is not authorized to treat others
as if they were children the way parents are authorized to treat their children as children. In its pure
form, then, paternalistic separatism represents an
undemocratic way of dealing with a liberal democratic society. Even in its pure form where the military is acting for the benefit of the society, it is undemocratic for the military, or any institution, to
decide for that society what it should want and what
is good for it. In this sense paternalistic separatism
in its pure form cannot help but gradually undermine democratic societies.
The situation is worse for paternalistic separatism in its degenerative form. By working not for
the benefit of the society but for the military, or what
is even worse, for the benefit of the corrupters, this
position directly destroys the democratic society.
Once the society comes to know that those it trusted
to defend itself steal, lie, and perhaps even kill for
216
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
TABLE 7-1
THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE MILITARY TO THE SOCIETY IT SERVES: SUMMARY OF THE FOUR MAJOR THEORIES
Theory
(Classic) Separatism
Paternalistic Separatism
Fusionism
Identicalism
Argument
Military should be
Military has society’s best
Military needs to maintain its
Military should be more like the
isolated from the
interests in mind and must
own ideals and traditions,
society it serves
political sphere
shield society from some of
but should share more of
what the military does
its activities with
the society it serves
Strengths
1. Military can then devote
1. Will keep potential enemies in
1. Military will benefit from
1. Soldiers can become effective
full attention to war
the dark about military
information exchange with a
without foregoing their
2. Keeps political sphere
capability
variety of institutions
civilian identity
from becoming militarized
2. Protects military from pre2. There will be less suspicion
2. Society will become more
3. Keeps military values and
mature criticism, especially
of the military if it is more
sympathetic with the
virtues strong by isolating
regarding necessary weapons
open and candid about
military and better undermilitary as a group
development and
activities
stand its needs
procurement
3. Only a few would
3. Military will assist more
be involved in sharing
with community tasks
information; military will
still be able to train and fight
effectively
Weaknesses
1. Modern technology makes
1. By seeking to control informa1. Open communication is not
1. Is not practical because the
it almost impossible to
tion flow, military jeopardizes
likely to be reciprocated; the
modern military needs more
keep the military separate
the trust of the civilian sector;
media prefers the bad news
isolation in order to train
2. Society itself has changed
cover-ups are more costly than
to the good news
with more technological
due to modern communibeing forthright to begin with
2. Theory assumes that the
weapons
cation and travel technol2. One cannot expect to practice
military has friends but
2. Separating military into
ogies, which prevent
paternalistic separatism in the
those friends often put
two groups—those who
separation/isolation
ideal; it is inherently
their own interests first
wear the uniform and those
3. Isolation results in
degenerative
who don’t—in order to
failure to learn from
3. Society cannot trust military
blend into society would
others
to only protect national security
foster resentment and
4. Military needs outside
or weapons development
disrupt cohesion
assessment of how good
secrets; society will assume
or bad it is
that corruption, waste, and
incompetence are also
protected items
Assessment
Needs to be rejected
Needs to be rejected because
Needs to be accepted because
Needs to be rejected
because it fails to
it directly destroys
it seeks to protect
because it fails to underunderstand that
democratic society through
democratic society through
stand that there must be
isolation is not an
the withholding of
honest exchange of
some separation of
option in a democratic
information
information
military from the
society
society it serves
217
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
their own benefit, trust in the system of government
its citizens have honored in the past quickly gets
lost. Paternalistic separatism simply must be rejected.
At the same time, this criticism of paternalistic
separatism points to the strength of fusionism. Although it might be naive in some ways, fusionism
at least makes a sincere effort to protect the political institutions of a democratic liberal society. By
encouraging honest communication with the rest
of government, the mass media, with business and
industry, academia, and the other institutions,
fusionism plays a supportive role here. Even if it
fails in this regard because some members of the
military lapse into paternalistic separatism, either
in the degenerative or nondegenerative form, it is
more likely to gain the respect of the rest of society
because the majority of those in the military will be
endeavoring to be good fusionists.
There is of course the criticism that fusionism
cannot be implemented in its pure form because
honest public communication involving the military will be a one-way street. Even if a fusionist
military establishment does its best to meet the standards of honesty, there will be no quid pro quo on
the other side.
But notice that although this is a serious flaw in
fusionism, it is not fatal. It is not as if honest communication is literally subverted when one side is
not cooperating. Those who communicate honestly
do so successfully quite apart from whether their
interlocutors speak truthfully or not in response.
Nor is it the case that honest speakers lose or suffer
because they are taken advantage of by their more
manipulative linguistic partners. Indeed, there are
times when honest speakers will lose. Some of these
losses will occur simply because of their “partner’s”
deceptive practices. When those who have been lied
to act on misleading information, they often will
pay a heavy price. That is no surprise. But these
losses will take place no matter whether the losers
themselves are honest or not. Those who are lied
to, or deceived in some other way, simply have to
learn to protect themselves from such practices.
Honest speakers do not have to trust those who are
trying to take advantage of them. They do so only
if they are foolish. But foolishness has nothing to
do with their fusionism. Thus a military organization lied to by a manufacturing firm must learn to
monitor that firm more carefully or, if that does not
work, must simply decide not to do business with
it any longer.
The second way honest speakers suffer is more
serious. Those listening to honest speakers may, if
they have no scruples, use the information given to
them to hurt those speakers. This is the form of
harm that makes fusionism seem naive. Good
fusionists, because they are honest and open, will
inevitably hand over information that those who
do not like them or those who have other agendas
(eg, selling television time) may use against them.
But, as we have seen, this downside of fusionism is
only part of the story. Honesty and openness has
an upside to it as well. Intelligent fusionists know
this. They are not so naive as to not know that these
traits help them avoid embarrassing cover-up incidents. Also they are not so naive as not to know
that the more trust they generate among those in
the society they serve, the more they are likely to
be believed in the future when they say something
like “We truly need this new weapon system.”
So naiveté is not necessarily an intrinsic aspect
of the fusionist position. Intelligent fusionists think
perhaps that the losses and gains in being honest
might come out about even; or perhaps they think
that the losses from being taken advantage of are
actually less than the gain. Whichever way they
view it, it is clear that fusionism is not so stupid a
position as it might have seemed initially. But beyond that, fusionism certainly holds the high moral
ground when compared to paternalistic separatism.
Unlike that position, fusionist policies deliberately
attempt to serve the society from within the liberal
democratic tradition. By doing so, we can say that
when a fusionist military goes to war, it does so by
following the will of the people.
In conclusion, we can see that (classic) separatism and paternalistic separatism may have worked
to some degree in the past, but the past is gone.
Identicalism could not work in any time period because it fails to fathom the true needs of the military. The present and future are best served by
fusionism, which blends the needs of the military
and the needs of the society it serves to ensure that
the society is powerfully protected from its enemies,
yet still safe from its powerful protector.
REFERENCES
1.
Fotion NG. Military Ethics: Looking Toward the Future. Stanford, Calif: Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University; 1990.
218
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
2.
Reichart JF, Sturm SR. Introductory essay [to the section titled “The American Military: Professional and Ethical Issues”]. In: Reichart JF, Sturm SR, eds. American Defense Policy. 5th ed. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1982: 720–729.
3.
Slater J. Military officers and politics. In: Reichart JF, Sturm SR, eds. American Defense Policy. 5th ed. Baltimore,
Md: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1982: 749–756.
4.
Gale RHW. The impact of political factors on military judgment. J Royal United Service Institution. 1954;99:36.
Cited by Huntington SP. The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations. Cambridge,
Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1957: 71–72.
5.
Huntington SP. The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations. Cambridge, Mass:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1957.
6.
Segal DR, Blair J, Newport F, Stephens S. Convergence, isomorphism, and interdependence at the civil-military
interface. J Polit Mil Sociol. 1974;2:157–172.
7.
Lissak M. Convergence and structural linkages between the armed forces and the society. In: Martin ML, McCrate
ES, eds. The Military, Militarism and the Polity: Essays in Honor of Morris Janowitz. New York: Free Press;
1984: 49–61.
8.
Marlowe DH. Personnel and manpower: Change and evolution in the human dimensions of military service.
In: Hermann CE, ed. American Defense Annual: 1994. New York: Lexington Books, Macmillan; 1994: 147–161.
9.
Sherman WT. Memoirs of General WT Sherman. Vol. 2. New York: Charles L Webster & Co; 1892: 426, 456.
10.
US Government Printing Office. Soviet Military Power: 1987. Washington DC: GPO; 1987.
11.
Gervasi T. Soviet Military Power: The Pentagon’s Propaganda Document, Annotated and Corrected. New York: Vintage Books; 1988.
12.
Moskos CC Jr. From institution to occupation: Trends in military organization. Armed Forces Soc. 1977;4:41–50.
13.
Schmitt E. Military planning an expanded role for the reserves. New York Times. November 25, 1994:A1, A11.
14.
Eitelberg MJ. Military manpower and the future force. In: Kruzel J, ed. American Defense Annual. 8th ed. New
York: Lexington Books, Macmillan; 1993: 135–152.
15.
Bradford ZB, Murphy JR. A new look at the military profession. In: Foerster S, Wright EN, eds. American Defense Policy. 6th ed. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1990: 613–618.
16.
Byron JL. The sailor and the state. Nav Inst Proc. May 1998:30–33.
17.
Grice HP. Logic and conversation. In: Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press;
1989: 22–40.
18.
Hackworth DH. Big bird, bad move. Newsweek. December 19, 1994:28–29.
19.
Bilton M, Sim K. Four Hours in My Lai. New York: Viking Penguin; 1992.
20.
Budiansky S, Goode EE, Gest T. The cold war experiments. US News and World Report. January 24, 1994:
32–36, 38.
21.
Borkowski M. Chronology of a scandal that tarnished the Navy. New York Times. February 9, 1994:B7.
22.
Gordone MR. US negotiates deal to remove bomb fuel in ex-Soviet republic. New York Times. November 23,
1994:1, 4.
219
The Military and Its Relationship to the Society It Serves
23.
American Medical Association Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Fundamental elements of the patientphysician relationship. In: Beauchamp TL, Walters L, eds. Contemporary Issues in Bioethics. 5th ed. Belmont,
Calif: Wadsworth Publishing Co; 1999: 40–41.
24.
President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical Research. Informed
consent as active, shared decisionmaking. In: Beauchamp TL, Walters L, eds. Contemporary Issues in Bioethics.
4th ed. Belmont, Calif: Wadsworth Publishing Co; 1994: 390–394. Reprinted from Making Health Care Decisions,
Vol. 1. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1992.
25.
Katz J. Physicians and patients: A history of silence. In: Beauchamp TL, Walters LR, eds. Contemporary Issues in
Bioethics. 4th ed. Belmont, Calif: Wadsworth Publishing Co; 1994: 145–152.
26.
Janowitz M. The Professional Soldier: A Social and Political Portrait. Glencoe, Ill: The Free Press of Glencoe;
1960: 420.
27.
Gansler JS. The future defense industrial base. In: Kruzel J, ed. American Defense Annual: 1993. New York: Lexington Books, Macmillan; 1993: 204–220.
28.
Carey M. Modularity times three: Flexibility, affordability keys to new attack submarine. Sea Power. April 1997:81–84.
29.
Carnevale JA Jr. Offensive, responsive and flexible: DD-21. Sea Power. September 1999:34–36.
30.
Thompson LB. Defense outsourcing: The coming revolution. Sea Power. February 1997:31–34.
31.
Kanji GK, Asher M. 100 Methods for Total Quality Management. London: Sage Publications; 1996.
32.
Trice RH. The policy making process: Actors and their impact. In: Reichart JF, Sturm SR, eds. American Defense
Policy. 5th ed. Baltimore, Md: The Johns Hopkins University Press; 1982: 504–507.
33.
Hackett JW. The military in the service of the state. In: Wakin MM, ed. War, Morality and the Military Profession.
2nd ed. Boulder, Colo: Westview Press; 1986: 104–120.
34.
Compart A. C-141 flight sets off new furor. Air Force Times. December 4, 1995:3.
35.
Fitzgerald AE. The Pentagonists: An Insider’s View of Waste, Mismanagement and Fraud in Defense Spending. Boston,
Mass: Houghton Mifflin Co; 1989.
36.
Boatman J. USA planned stealthy UV to replace SR-71. Jane’s Defense Weekly. December 17, 1994:1, 3.
37.
Smith H. The Power Game: How Washington Works. New York: Random House; 1988.
220
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
