105
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
Chapter 4
THE SCIENCE BEHIND THE ART:
EMPIRICAL RESEARCH ON MEDICAL
ETHICS
DANIEL P. SULMASY, OFM, MD, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
TYPES OF ETHICAL INQUIRY
TYPES OF STUDIES IN DESCRIPTIVE ETHICS
Anthropology
Sociology
Epidemiology
Health Services Research
Psychology
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DESCRIPTIVE AND NORMATIVE BIOETHICS
Ethics and Opinion Surveys
The Fact/Value Distinction
Illicit Inferences
Empirical Studies and Normative Ethics
Normative and Descriptive Ethics: Two-Way Feedback
JUDGING GOOD DESCRIPTIVE ETHICS
Survey Research
Qualitative Research
Multimethod Research
Experimental Methods
Theoretical Framework
Biases in Empirical Research on Ethics
Detached Disinterest
RESOURCES IN ETHICS
National Reference Center for Bioethics Literature
Bioethicsline
Bioethics Journals
The Internet
DESCRIPTIVE BIOETHICS AND MILITARY MEDICINE
CONCLUSION
*Professor of Medicine and Director of the Bioethics Institute, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York; and Sisters of Charity Chair in
Ethics, John J. Conley Department of Ethics, Saint Vincent’s Hospital and Medical Center, 153 West 11th Street, New York, New York 10011;
formerly, Associate Professor of Medicine, Georgetown University; and Director, Center for Clinical Bioethics, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC
106
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
J.O. Chapin
Doctor’s Heritage
1944
The last of seven images from the series The Seven Ages of a Physician. The series depicts the life progression of a
doctor from birth to first encounter with suffering, through medical training, professional experience, service to
country during war, and research to further knowledge. In this final painting in the series, the doctor’s heritage is
that of passing along to the next generation his knowledge and vision regarding how to best be a physician. That
involves not just understanding the basics of medicine, as depicted in the right half of the painting, but also understanding medicine in a more complete context, which is symbolized in the left side of the painting with the globe, the
skull, and the book. The wisdom that he passes on includes understanding how doctors make decisions regarding
patients—the very essence of being a complete physician—and the focus of this chapter.
Art: Courtesy of Novartis Pharmaceuticals.
107
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
INTRODUCTION
With characteristic elegance, Aristotle once said
that ethics is “about what to do.”1(1103b. 28–31) If ethics
is truly as broad as that, then many sorts of ethical
questions will inevitably arise, even if one limits
the sphere of inquiry to biomedical ethics. A philosopher might be inclined to ask, “How does a physician ever know the right thing to do in any given
situation?” A physician might be more inclined to
ask simply, “What ought I to do with this patient
now?” A government agency or a disinterested social scientist might be inclined to ask, “What do
physicians usually do in that situation?” And physicians might ask a health services researcher,
“What data can you give me to help me to decide
what I ought to do?”
The latter two questions are empirical questions.
And because contemporary Western medicine is based
upon empirical science, it was inevitable that physicians should begin to engage in empirical research
in bioethics. In fact, empirical studies now constitute
the most prevalent form of articles on bioethics published in the medical literature. But many readers remain puzzled by empirical research in bioethics.
This chapter addresses some of these questions.
The chapter begins by distinguishing empirical
ethics from other sorts of ethical inquiry, then provides an overview of the kinds of empirical studies
that count as empirical research in bioethics. The
chapter discusses criteria for quality in evaluating
empirical research in bioethics, and describes the
proper relationship between empirical bioethics and
philosophical bioethics.
The range of studies falling under the broad
canopy of “empirical bioethics” is truly astounding. The disciplines of sociology, anthropology, social psychology, economics, epidemiology, and
health services research (to name just a few) all have
scholars who “do” bioethics, and all these disciplines have made enriching contributions to the
field. These types of research begin with empirical
observations, and take empirical observation as
their standard of validity. It is not always immediately clear, however, that these types of research
should have anything whatsoever to do with ethics.
And so it is necessary, at the outset, to understand the
nature of empirical research in ethics broadly.
TYPES OF ETHICAL INQUIRY
There are three basic types of ethical inquiry—
normative ethics, metaethics, and descriptive ethics. 2
Normative ethics is the type of ethical study that
is most familiar. Normative ethics is the branch of
philosophical or theological study that sets out to
give answers to the questions, “What ought to be
done? What ought not to be done? What kinds of
persons ought we strive to become?” Normative
ethics sets out to answer these questions in a systematic, critical fashion, and to justify the answers
that are offered. In bioethics, normative ethics is
concerned with arguments about such topics as the
morality of physician-assisted suicide and whether
so-called partial birth abortions are ever morally
permissible. Normative ethics constitutes the core
of all ethical inquiry. It is because of the normative
questions at stake that other types of ethical inquiry
have their point.
Metaethics is the branch of philosophical or theological inquiry that investigates the meaning of
moral terms, the logic and linguistics of moral reasoning, and the fundamental questions of the nature of good and evil, how one knows what is right
or wrong, and what sorts of arguments can be used
to justify one’s moral positions. It is the most abstract type of ethical inquiry, but it is vital to normative investigations. Whether or not it is explicitly acknowledged, all normative inquiry requires
some sort of a stand regarding metaethical questions. Metaethics asks, “What does ‘right’ mean?
What does ‘ought’ mean? What is implied by saying ‘I ought to do X’? Is morality objective or subjective? Are there any moral truths that transcend
particular cultures? If so, how does one know what
these truths are?” Stands regarding all of these questions lurk below the surface of most normative ethical discussions, whether in general normative ethics, bioethics, or military bioethics. Sometimes it is
only possible to understand the grounds upon
which people disagree by investigating questions
at this level of abstraction. In most cases, however,
there is enough general agreement that normative
inquiry can proceed without explicitly engaging
metaethical questions.
The concern of this chapter, however, is the third
type of ethical inquiry, descriptive ethics. Descriptive
ethics does not directly engage the questions of
what one ought to do or of how people use ethical
108
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
terms. Descriptive ethics asks empirical questions
such as, “How do people think they ought to act in
this particular area of normative concern? What
facts are relevant to this normative ethical inquiry?
How do people actually behave in this particular
circumstance of ethical concern?” In bioethics, the
literature is replete with descriptive ethics’ studies
such as surveys asking what patients and physicians
think about the morality of euthanasia and assisted
suicide, or about how much money might be saved
through the widespread use of advance directives,
or about what percentage of unwed women who
become pregnant choose to undergo elective abortion.
No descriptive ethics study ever answers a normative question about what should be done. That
is a matter for normative ethics. Yet, descriptive ethics can be very helpful to normative inquiry, and
normative inquiry can be helpful to descriptive ethics as well. I will return to these themes in more
detail later in this chapter.
TYPES OF STUDIES IN DESCRIPTIVE ETHICS
Because good ethics always depends upon good
facts, almost any empirical field might be able to
make a contribution to descriptive ethics. Nonetheless, there are certain techniques and certain disciplines that are especially well-suited to descriptive
research in bioethics. A comprehensive survey of
all empirical studies that have contributed to bioethics would be well beyond what could be accomplished in a single chapter. This chapter will instead
briefly discuss those empirical fields most often
used. Readers interested in exploring this subject
further are encouraged to read Methods in Medical
Ethics. 3
Anthropology
Perhaps the first empirical field to have made
contributions to descriptive ethics is anthropology.
Anthropology has made, and continues to make,
many significant scholarly contributions to bioethics. Questions about cultural variations in approaches to matters of moral concern have been of
interest since at least the time of Aristotle,1(1148b. 20–24)
challenging assumptions about the relationship
between morality and culture. Classical investigations
have included studies of child rearing in various
cultures by such preeminent figures as Margaret
Mead. 4 Studies in multiple cultures of the treatment
of infants born with various deformities have also
had an influence on contemporary bioethics, challenging contemporary Western prohibitions on
practices such as infanticide. 5 Contemporary ethnographic techniques have been used to study, for
instance, the difficulties involved in implementing
the federal government’s Patient Self-Determination
Act on Navajo Indian reservations. 6 Other studies
have attempted to use ethnographic analysis to
study differences in the role of the family vs autonomous individuals in bioethical decision making among Chinese and Latino cancer patients in
California. 7 Anthropological studies have explored
the distinctive culture of surgeons as well, examining how that culture affects selection, training, and
professional demeanor of surgeons. 8 Still other investigators have used conversational analysis of
transcripts of audiotapes of physician–patient interactions to describe certain styles of physician
verbal behavior and how these relate to patient satisfaction and malpractice risk. 9 All of these sorts of
studies help to broaden our understanding of multiple issues in contemporary bioethics. Anthropological studies have also raised troubling normative questions about such issues as the meaning of
the Western notion of informed consent in other
cultural settings. For example, anthropologists have
looked at the question of the meaning of informed
consent in vaccine trials in Africa in which individuals defer decision making to their tribal chief. 10
Anthropology provides fascinating insights into
the status quo of the physician–patient relationship
in the West as well, raising questions about whether
reform might be called for. Anthropologists will
continue to make contributions to bioethics as the
field enters the 21st century.
Sociology
Sociology has also played an important role in
descriptive bioethics. Renee Fox was among the
pioneers in the field, lending her expertise as a sociologist to such questions as the Hopkins Baby
case,11 dialysis, and organ transplants. 12 Sociologists
have also studied the training of physicians, with a
keen eye towards the ways in which the training
influences the style and the content of ethical decision making by physicians. 13 Still others have studied such phenomena as partial codes (ie, “chemical
code only,” or “CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation] but no intubation”), noting how these often
arise in the setting of disputes between staff and
109
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
family members. 14 In another important example,
the President’s Commission sponsored a sociological study of informed consent in clinical practice. 15
The chief techniques employed by sociologists have
included both detailed interviews and participantobserver studies. In participant-observer studies,
the investigator inserts himself or herself into the
routine of clinical practice, developing enough trust,
and blending well enough into the routine to minimize the impact of his or her presence, while preserving enough objectivity as an outside observer
to describe effectively and comment upon the processes under observation. 16 These studies hold up
a mirror in which members of the healthcare profession can gain insight into their behaviors regarding matters of bioethical concern.
Epidemiology
Another discipline that has made important contributions in the field of descriptive bioethics has
been epidemiology, a branch of medical research
that counts the incidence and distribution of health
problems in a population. Beginning in the late
1970s, physician researchers trained in epidemiology began to conduct empirical studies regarding
bioethics. As people who count, epidemiologists
began to sound a more quantitative note that had
not been evident in the bioethics studies of sociologists and anthropologists. Early studies were literally studies that counted the frequency of certain
clinical events of bioethics interest, such as the frequency of ethical dilemmas on an internal medicine service or the frequency with which DNR (do
not resuscitate) orders were written. 17 These studies began to appear in leading journals of clinical
medicine. Moral dilemmas had been encountered
for centuries in medical practice, and DNR orders
had been around for a long time, but these studies
brought new attention to bioethics by bringing these
issues to the attention of clinicians. Moreover, they
made irrefutable what had been argued by more
philosophically minded bioethicists before—the
practice of medicine is laced through and through
with bioethical decision making.
Health Services Research
Epidemiology, along with several other fields,
has contributed to the burgeoning field of health
services research. Many bioethical issues have been
addressed by studies in the field of health services
research. Investigators in this field use opinion surveys, validated instruments regarding quality of
life, decision analysis, technology assessment, enormous insurance claims’ data sets, chart reviews, and
even randomized controlled trials to study the delivery of healthcare services. These studies have
looked at questions of ethical concern such as the
care of the dying,18 factors associated with the writing of orders not to resuscitate,19 the implementation of euthanasia in the Netherlands,20 the quality
of care delivered by managed care organizations,21
patient perceptions of informed consent,22 and
many other areas. The standards with which such
research is conducted have become quite high.
Psychology
Finally, the field of psychology deserves special
mention as a discipline that has made, and continues to make, important contributions to the field of
descriptive bioethics. Kohlberg’s theories of moral
development have been used to conduct studies
charting the moral development of medical students23 and even of bioethicists. 24 Carol Gilligan and
other critics have charged that Kohlberg’s schema
is biased by the fact that he exclusively studied boys
and therefore overemphasizes the themes of justice
and autonomy in his theory of moral development.
They have launched a whole new school of thought
in philosophical and theological bioethics known
as care based ethics. 25 This school has had an especially strong influence on nursing ethics. Still others have used Bandura’s social learning theory to
look at the impact of ethics education on the knowledge, attitudes, and perceived self-efficacy (confidence) of medical house officers and faculty. 26
Besides moral development and education, psychological theories and techniques have been used
to look at morally important questions such as the
anxiety associated with genetic testing27 and ways
to change sexual behavior among men at risk for
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) infection. 28
Still others have looked at such interesting questions as the ability of surrogate decision makers to
predict what sorts of treatments their terminally ill
loved ones would want in the event that they were
to become unable to speak for themselves. 29
While by no means exhaustive, this brief survey
of empirical studies in bioethics from the fields of
anthropology, sociology, epidemiology, health services research, and psychology serves to demonstrate the incredible breadth and variety of disciplines and techniques that contribute to descriptive
bioethics. All are fascinating. All hold a definite
110
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
place in the bioethics of the future. The list could
be expanded by adding other disciplines such as
history, economics, education, public policy, government, decision science, and others. In addition,
fields that are less clearly empirical, such as law and
literature, could be added. But as I noted above,
none of these studies directly addresses the normative question that is at the heart of bioethics—what
ought to be done. What then is the place of empirical research in bioethics?
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DESCRIPTIVE AND NORMATIVE BIOETHICS
Ethics and Opinion Surveys
Surveys do not give normative answers to moral
questions. In a pluralistic and increasingly multicultural democratic republic like the United States,
in which the rule of law is predicated upon majority rule, this can sometimes be forgotten. As a tolerant society, we try to leave many questions unanswered by the law. And those questions that require
an answer are settled by referenda or the votes of
freely elected representatives. These democratic
procedures settle the legal question.
But not everything that is legal is moral, and not
everything that is moral is legal. Laws can be immoral. Segregation in the United States and apartheid in South Africa were legal in the recent past,
but this does not mean that they were moral once,
and then became immoral when the law changed.
Majority rule, even by free election, can commit
moral error. Adolph Hitler, after all, was made
Chancellor of Germany by the vote of freely elected
representatives in a democratic republic. In the end,
ethics judges laws as morally good or morally bad.
And so, the opinion survey, a commonly used
empirical technique in bioethics, should never be
construed to give “the answer.” Rather, these surveys should be viewed as tools to examine whether
one or another question is particularly vexing and
divisive, or whether almost everyone agrees about
the proper approach to the question. This may serve
the purpose of helping to decide whether the question is worth discussing. If no one disagrees, there
may be little to discuss. On the other hand, it might
still be very interesting to develop good philosophical arguments about why, for example, patients
ought to be afforded the opportunity to give informed consent before participating in clinical research. The reality is, however, that such a paper
would be unlikely to wind up as the lead article in
a popular clinical journal.
Surveys can also be used to say what other factors might be associated with particular opinions
about moral issues, pointing out, for instance, significant cultural divides. Surveys can demonstrate
racial differences such as the fact that AfricanAmericans are less likely to support euthanasia than
are white Americans. 30 But it is critical to understand
the limitations of such survey research in ethics.
The Fact/Value Distinction
The limitations of survey research probably illustrate one aspect of a more general principle in
ethics known as the fact/value distinction. 31 There
is probably no single principle in ethics that is more
important to discuss with respect to the relationship between descriptive and normative studies in
bioethics. Most (but not all) ethicists subscribe to
this fact/value distinction, which has also been
called “the naturalistic fallacy.” It was originally
proposed by David Hume in his Treatise of Human
Nature in which he noted that many ethical arguments, particularly in scholastic philosophy, consisted of a series of factual statements using the verb
‘is,’ leading to a conclusion using the verb ‘ought.’32
This struck Hume as peculiar. He wondered whether
any set of facts ever added up, by itself, to entail a
normative conclusion.
Over the ensuing centuries there have been many
discussions of this principle. Some who have attacked
the fact/value distinction have noted that certain “social facts” do appear to entail normative conclusions.
John Searle points out that the fact that I made a promise to do something does seem to imply a normative
conclusion, namely that I ought to do it. 33 Others have
argued that certain facts about the role and purpose
of something or someone also seem to entail normative conclusions. Alasdair MacIntyre34 points out that
the fact that something is a knife does entitle one to
draw certain conclusions about what makes a knife
“good” (eg, sharpness, sturdiness, and so forth). Likewise, he argues the fact that someone occupies a role
as the practitioner of certain human practices does
entitle one to draw certain conclusions about what
makes that individual a good practitioner of that role
(eg, the fact that someone is a soldier implies that if
that person is a “good” soldier, one can expect courage, loyalty, dependability, and so forth). Similarly,
one might say that the fact that someone is a physician entitles one to draw certain conclusions about
what makes that person a “good” physician (eg, competence, compassion, respectfulness, and so forth).
111
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
Illicit Inferences
So, it does seem that there are at least a few
uncontroversial ways in which certain kinds of facts
can entail normative conclusions, as well as some
sense in which knowing the purpose or function of
an object or enterprise says something regarding
what is good or bad about it relative to its purpose
or function. Nonetheless, there are also some
uncontroversial ways in which Hume’s warning
about the fact/value distinction seems correct. Even
defenders of the possibility of drawing normative
conclusions from certain special sorts of facts tend
to agree that the fact/value distinction holds true
over a variety of other important sets of facts. The
fact/value distinction holds true over the following five sets of facts that are important in empirical
ethics research:
1.
Historical facts do not entail normative conclusions. One might call this the historicist
version of the naturalistic fallacy. For example, the mere fact that infanticide was
practiced in the early Mediterranean world
does not entitle one to conclude that there
is nothing morally problematic about the
practice. Likewise, knowing that payment
for healthcare has never before been organized with financial incentives for physicians to provide fewer services does not
entitle one to conclude that such payment
structures are immoral. Whether something has or has not been done in the past
does not mean that it is moral or immoral.
2.
Majority opinions and behaviors do not entail
normative conclusions. This has been discussed above regarding opinion surveys in
bioethics. A survey demonstrating that
75% of people polled might approve of the
use of surrogate mothers in certain circumstances would not entail that it is morally
appropriate. Likewise, the fact that many
physicians say that they are willing to falsify medical insurance claims in order to
obtain better benefits for their patients
does not imply that such practices are morally appropriate. 35 The fact that everyone
says that something is proper, or that everyone acts in a certain way, does not make
it proper to act that way. The appeal to
popular opinion can sometimes amount to
an example of the informal logical fallacy
of the argumentum ad populum.
3.
The simple fact that something is legal or illegal does not make it moral or immoral. This
was also discussed above. In general, the
moral goodness of a just society will be
reflected in its laws, but even Thomas
Aquinas thought it unwise for a government to pass laws regarding all aspects of
the moral life. 36 Such an effort would probably be impossible. And so, questions
about the proper relationship between law
and morality will be operative even in
morally homogeneous societies. Nor does
the fact that one might be sued constitute
a moral argument. The threat of a lawsuit
does not render a proposed course of action moral or immoral. Legal consequences
are consequences to be weighed in making a decision with the same moral weight
one generally gives to other types of consequences in making moral decisions. For
example, if one is a strict deontologist, basing decisions solely upon doing one’s duty,
legal consequences will have no bearing on
the decision whatsoever. For others, the
threshold might vary for taking a moral
stand depending upon practical concerns
about consequences. Under threat of lawsuit, one might not want to make a moral
weighed daily, even though one might beneficently think this, from a moral point
of view, in the patient’s best interest. Nonetheless, fidelity to patients and professional integrity does sometimes demand
that one do what one thinks to be morally
correct even under threat of lawsuit. In the
end, law does not give the answer. To illustrate this, there are even cases in which
one can be sued no matter which course of
action one pursues. Consider a patient who
clearly expresses her wishes not to be
placed on a ventilator and then goes into a
coma. Suppose her husband the lawyer
then demands that she be intubated when
she develops respiratory distress. In such
a case one could be sued no matter what
course one were to pursue. Successfully resuscitating the patient could invite her to
sue for battery. Failure to attempt resuscitation could invite her husband to sue for
negligence. The law never settles the moral
matter. One must rely on moral analysis
and do what one determines to be morally
right.
4.
The opinions of experts do not necessarily entail moral conclusions. For example, the
112
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
simple fact that a clinical ethics consultant
has recommended a course of action does
not mean that this is the morally correct
course of action. Expert advice can and
should be obtained in morally troubling
cases. The opinions of experts should be
taken quite seriously. But experts often disagree, and experts can be wrong. “Expertise” among ethics consultants, as is true
of any group of experts, is limited by their
training, knowledge, practical wisdom,
and potential biases. Appeal to expert
opinion represents the informal logical fallacy of the argumentum ad verecundiam.
5.
The fact that something is biologically true does
not entail automatic moral conclusions. One
can give multiple illustrative cases to demonstrate the absurdity of such reasoning.
The fact that human beings do not have
wings does not imply that it is immoral for
human beings to fly. Likewise, the simple
fact that the human fetus initiates brain
wave activity at a certain stage of development does not, in itself, imply anything
about the morality of abortion at one stage
of development or another. An often misunderstood moral theory relevant to this
issue is known as natural law. It is sometimes thought that natural law means that
biology itself is normative. Illustrative of
this type of misunderstanding is the manner in which some would hold that natural law theory concludes that certain sexual
behaviors are immoral because they are
“unnatural” in a biological sense. However, this is a misconstrual of natural law
theory. Natural law theory is based on the
supposition that there is such a thing as
human nature, but that human nature is
not merely understood biologically. Natural law holds that human nature includes
biological, rational, affective, aesthetic, and
spiritual dimensions, and that certain acts
contribute to the flourishing of human beings as human, while some do not, in accord with this broad understanding of human nature. 37 Natural law does not argue
that brute biological acts imply immediately clear moral truths.
Empirical Studies and Normative Ethics
How, then, do empirical studies contribute to
medical ethics? Empirical studies elucidate facts.
But the fact/value distinction precludes moral inference from brute facts. This might appear to make
empirical studies irrelevant. Such a conclusion
would be premature. There are at least seven ways
in which empirical studies can be important in ethics.
Purely Descriptive Studies
Purely descriptive studies of what human beings
believe about morality, how they change with time,
and how they behave in situations of moral concern can be of enormous intellectual interest in and
of themselves. Anthropological studies of how human societies differ with respect to the treatment
of elderly people, for instance, can be fascinating.
Differences in sexual morality can be interesting.
Differences in the ways in which cultures pay for
medical care, whether by government insurance,
private for-profit managed care organizations, or
the payment of chickens to the local shaman can be
very stimulating to learn about. Such studies need
have no normative purpose.
Yet descriptive ethics studies are interesting precisely because they illuminate human responses to
normative questions. To study how different cultures grow rice would be of interest to an anthropologist, but not necessarily to an ethicist. When
anthropologists or other social scientists apply their
techniques to the study of normatively interesting
questions, they are “doing” descriptive ethics. In
many cases, the relationship between normative
ethics and descriptive ethics is only that normative
ethics has raised the questions of interest for empirical study.
It is of interest to know why certain persons have
the opinions they do about certain disputed normative questions even if the answers one gathers
through survey research are acknowledged to have
no normative implications. If Southerners, for example, were to be less concerned about the ethics
of using animals in trauma research, and this were
to be found independent of race and religion, this
would be an interesting empirical fact. It might lead
one to ask further empirical questions or further
normative questions. It deals with an interesting
normative issue about research ethics, but has no
normative implications in itself.
A good deal of empirical research in ethics is of
this nature—carefully describing anthropological,
sociological, psychological, and epidemiological
facts that are of interest. They are of interest because
the subject is normative. But the techniques are descriptive and the conclusions have no immediate
normative implications.
113
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
Testing Compliance With Established or New Norms
Another way in which descriptive studies can be
related to normative ethics is through studies that
describe compliance with existing moral norms.
Again, such studies do not answer the normative
question. But provided there is widespread acceptance of a moral norm, it is of interest to see how frequently the moral norm is actually adhered to by
study subjects. In these studies, there is no question
about the norm itself. What is of interest is the extent to which human beings live up to it, or the extent to which it is legally or socially enforced. For
instance, almost everyone thinks that if patients do
not wish to be connected to a ventilator, they should
not receive ventilator therapy. Yet, a multicenter study
of critically ill patients has shown that in many cases
patients’ preferences are overlooked and they frequently receive therapy they did not want. 18
In other cases, new policies or procedures, designed to “operationalize” certain moral norms, are
introduced into clinical settings. Descriptive studies can help to decide whether or not the plan for
operationalizing the norm has been successful. Illustratively, studies have shown that the Patient SelfDetermination Act, designed to facilitate communication between clinicians and patients about the
patients’ wishes for end-of-life care, has fallen far
short of expectations. 38 This not mean that the norm
is morally right or morally wrong. It only means
that the implementation of the normative rule may
need to be re-thought from a practical point of view.
Such studies represent an important contribution
of empirical research to bioethics.
Descriptions of Facts Relevant to Normative Arguments
Good ethics depends upon good facts. Failure to
thoroughly understand the facts of a situation will
clearly make moral decision making a perilous activity. Further, many normative arguments depend
upon factual information, even though these facts
themselves do not confer normative status upon the
arguments. For example, one might argue that liver
transplantation should be withheld from alcoholics, because the chances of relapse of alcoholism are
so high that the prognosis will be poor. In fact, it
turns out that the survival of alcoholic patients with
liver transplants is equivalent to that of patients
transplanted for other conditions. 39 The moral argument against transplants for alcoholics, based on
a presumption of poor prognosis, is thus falsified
by the facts disclosed in a descriptive study.
The reliance upon facts in these sorts of arguments
does not violate the fact/value distinction. The premises in these arguments are both moral and factual,
not simply factual. Such arguments are not only
permissible, but are essential to moral reasoning.
Ethics is concerned with the world. Ethics is, in
this sense, the most practical of all branches of philosophy. Moral premises relate facts to duties and
virtues. Moral arguments often take forms such as,
1.
Whenever situation X occurs, it is permissible to do Y.
2.
If Z is true, then I am in situation X.
3.
Therefore, if Z is true, it is permissible to
do Y.
Proposition 1 is a moral premise. Proposition 2
is empirical. Empirical studies can make important
contributions to ethics if they can show whether a
proposition in the form of proposition 2 is always
true, or under what conditions Z obtains. Knowing
this empirical information is critical to determining whether one is bound by the obligation in
proposition 3.
For example, proposition 1 might be the moral
rule known in medical ethics as “therapeutic privilege.”40 This states that it is morally permissible to
(Y) withhold information from patients if (X) disclosing that information would cause the patient very
grave harm. The key to applying this moral rule will
be to determine under what conditions situation X is
true. Someone might argue (as generations of physicians up until the 1970s did) that whenever patients
had cancer, informing them would cause the patients
great harm. 41 Physicians were constructing a moral
argument based upon a proposition of the form of
proposition 2—If the patient has cancer (Z), this is
a situation in which disclosing the facts will cause
them great harm (X). This is precisely the sort of
situation in which descriptive ethics can play an
enormously important role in bioethics. In the 1960s,
empirical studies were undertaken to show that patients with cancer overwhelmingly wanted to be
told of their diagnosis and felt that they had the
coping skills to handle it. 42 Further studies were
then performed to demonstrate that patients, by and
large, felt much better when they were informed of
their diagnoses, and perhaps even evidenced better
cooperation with treatment and better outcomes.
Descriptive ethics studies showed that proposition 2
was false when Z was cancer. Therefore, the moral
conclusion, proposition 3, could not be inferred.
Physicians’ practices changed. By the 1980s, 90% of
American physicians reported that they routinely informed their patients with cancer of their diagnoses. 43
114
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Slippery Slope Arguments
Another way in which empirical studies can uncover facts that are relevant to normative arguments
is when so-called “slippery slope” arguments are
invoked in moral debates. Slippery slope arguments
are those that suggest that if a certain moral rule is
changed, other, untoward moral consequences will
follow. For instance, some have argued that if physician assisted suicide (PAS) were made legal for
competent adults in the United States, several types
of slippery slopes would ensue.
Down a legal slippery slope, a right to PAS for
competent adults with full motor capacity would
seem to be prejudicial towards those who are handicapped and incapable of taking lethal doses of prescription medicines themselves. 44 Following the
principle of equal protection, this would lead to an
extension from assisted suicide (for those capable
of taking pills) to active euthanasia (for those incapable of taking pills themselves). Further, limiting
PAS and euthanasia to competent patients might be
seen as prejudicial towards those who are mentally
incapacitated, and a violation of equal protection.
Some might argue that the same right should extend to those mentally incapacitated individuals
who might have specified a preference for euthanasia through an advance directive, as well as to
others who might reasonably be construed to have
such a preference, even if they had never been fully
mentally capable or if they had never specified their
preferences. This would lead from voluntary euthanasia to nonvoluntary (ie, not specifically requested) euthanasia.
Down a psychological slippery slope, it might be
argued that there is a psychological tendency to be
desensitized to the practice of killing, and that once
physicians have crossed this barrier, they will naturally be freer to extend the circumstances under
which they would be willing to provide such interventions. 45 In corroboration of this slippery slope
concern, Dr. Herbert Hendin has quoted a Dutch
physician as saying, “The first time you do it, euthanasia is difficult, like climbing a mountain.”46
These sorts of moral arguments have an empirical form. The facts to which they refer, however, are
facts about a possible future that has not yet been
realized. Therefore, empirical studies cannot answer
the question directly about whether or not a slippery slope will occur, but they can contribute to an
understanding of the likelihood that the slippery
slope will occur in a given set of circumstances.
Descriptive studies, which can contribute to our
understanding of the likelihood of slippery slopes,
include: (a) historical studies of similar situations,
(b) studies of other settings in which the change in
moral norms has already taken place, (c) psychological studies of those likely to be affected by the
slippery slope concerns, and (d) legal studies of statutes and case law precedents that might be relevant.
So, to continue using the example of PAS, slippery
slope arguments have been bolstered or attacked by
studies that indirectly bear upon predictions regarding PAS in the United States: (a) historical studies of
pre-Nazi German programs for the mentally retarded and psychiatrically ill,47 (b) contemporary
health services studies of the practice of euthanasia in the Netherlands,48 (c) psychological studies
of the relationship between cost-containing attitudes of physicians and their willingness to prescribe
assisted suicide,49 and (d) legal studies comparing
the evolution of laws and policies regarding the
withholding and withdrawing of life-sustaining
treatments to what might be expected for PAS. 50 All
of these sorts of empirical studies contribute indirectly to the slippery slope argument. To repeat, a
slippery slope argument cannot be directly supported by any empirical study. The slippery slope
argument envisages a likely future so fraught with
moral danger that one ought not engage in the social experiment of finding out whether the predicted
slippery slope will come to pass. The argument is
that the social experiment would be too risky to
take. Such arguments can be bolstered or attacked,
however, by indirect examinations of related facts
that help to clarify how realistic such fears might
be. Descriptive studies in ethics can thus play a key
role in assessing the plausibility of slippery slope
arguments.
Aside from slippery slope arguments per se,
empirical studies can also suggest the consequences
of certain courses of action in a manner that helps
moral decision makers. One need not be a utilitarian to pay attention to consequences in making
moral decisions. Empirical studies can help point
out consequences that may be important in making moral decisions. For example, if the chances of
a patient surviving an operation are only 1 in 5,000,
the argument that it would be unjust to withhold
the treatment seems much less persuasive than if
the chances were 1 in 5.
The Empirical Testing of Normative Theories
Sometimes the relationship between normative
and descriptive ethics can be very tight and very
115
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
direct. This is particularly the case when normative
theory prescribes practices that have components
that can be empirically tested. An excellent example
of this is the normative theory of substituted judgment. Based upon legal theory and moral philosophy’s stress on the importance of respect for the
autonomy of individuals who are making biomedical choices, the theory of substituted judgment was
developed. According to this theory, when patients
lose their decision making capacity, they ought not
thereby forfeit all of their autonomy. What the patient thinks and feels might not be directly known,
but one might still express respect for the patient’s
autonomy if one were to make the decision that one
thought the patient would have made if he or she
had been able to speak with full decision making
capacity. Thus, one asks clinically, not “What would
you like us to do for your mother?” but rather,
“What do you think your mother would have
wanted if she had been able to tell us herself?” Decisions made according to the spirit of the latter
question are made according to the theory of substituted judgment. 51
This is all well and good as a theoretical construct, but one notices quickly that there is an empirically testable question embedded in the
theory—just how well can a loved one predict what
the patient would have wanted? Is it a charade to
think that human beings, even if closely related, can
actually choose what the patient would have chosen? Does asking for a substituted judgment
amount to paying mere lip service to the principle
of autonomy, while if we were honest with ourselves we would admit that we are choosing according to the “best interests” standard, choosing what
we think is in the best interests of the patient?
This sort of provocative question has led to a series of very interesting empirical studies on the validity of substituted judgments. 29,52–54 In these studies, patients are asked to imagine themselves in one
or another serious clinical situation and to choose
the life-sustaining measures they think they would
want in that situation. Simultaneously, the patient’s
surrogate decision maker is asked what he or she
thinks the patient would want. The results are then
compared to see how well the patient does. Agreement rates have averaged about 70%—statistically
better than chance alone, but far from perfect. This
has led some ethicists to rethink the substituted
judgment standard. Others have argued that the
moral validity of the standard remains intact, but
that what is needed are ways to improve surrogate
decision making. Once again, the descriptive facts
learned from empirical studies do not answer the
normative question. But by calling into question the
practicality of a normative ethical rule, descriptive
ethics can constructively challenge normative ethics. In Kantian terms, ‘ought’ implies ‘can.’55 One
ought not establish moral duties that are impossible
to carry out.
Case Reports
As in other aspects of medical practice, case reports have a role to play in medical ethics. Careful
descriptions of unusual situations can serve as a
springboard for substantial normative discussion.
Others who might encounter similar situations in
the future can benefit from having read and considered the ethical issues in a case encountered by
a colleague at another institution. Those who subscribe to the theory of casuistry (moral reasoning
by analogies between cases) as their sole method
of approaching cases in medical ethics depend
heavily upon good case descriptions. 56 Those who
appeal to narrative and care-based theories of ethics depend upon “thick” descriptions of the case,
including details about interpersonal dynamics and
emotions that are often excluded from more traditional case discussions. Because case reports are
now generally frowned upon as anecdotal and unscientific in the standard medical literature, in some
ways, the case report has experienced something
of a revival with the advent of medical ethics. In
ethics, there is no escaping the case.
Demonstration Projects
Finally, descriptive ethics studies can be conducted in which normative ideas can be implemented in clinical settings not so much to be tested
as simply to be demonstrated and discussed. The
empirical project can thus function as a vehicle for
the promulgation of a normative idea. This happens
frequently in medical ethics. It is particularly common in ethics education. Few people will argue with
teaching ethics to medical students or to nurses, for
example. But it is important in some ways simply
to demonstrate that such programs can be successfully implemented. 57 The content of the program
might be shared so that others might benefit by
comparing that content with their own program’s
content, or that others might be inspired to start a
program of their own. Pitfalls in the implementation of the program can be discussed for the benefit of others. Such empirical descriptions might
116
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
also include simple survey data about the acceptability of the course and its perceived value and
importance.
Similar descriptive reports can be generated regarding other programs, such as ethics consult services, ombudsperson programs for medical students experiencing ethical conflicts in relation to
faculty or residents, or programs on research integrity. All of these can contribute substantially to advancing the field of medical ethics.
Normative and Descriptive Ethics: Two-Way
Feedback
Based on the discussion above, it should be clear
that the relationship between normative and descriptive research in bioethics is one of two-way
feedback. Normative ethics can generate claims that
are associated with empirically testable hypotheses,
or set normative standards that must be operationalized and can be studied in educational or
practice settings. The empirical lessons gained from
such studies in turn feed back upon and influence
normative theory. Normative arguments may also
depend upon facts that can be garnered from empirical inquiry, thus sustaining or refuting the empirical
basis for the normative arguments. Descriptive ethics studies can also generate new material for normative study. Anthropological and sociological
studies can raise questions about the universal applicability of normative claims. Surveys can identify areas of disagreement that are ripe for ethical
inquiry. Case studies can give rise to new questions
that have never been addressed in normative inquiry, or can supply the entire basis for casuistic,
narrative, and care-based studies.
The two types of ethical inquiry are thus mutually supportive. Good studies in normative ethics
will be grounded in good empirical data. Good descriptive studies will be shaped by ethical theory,
providing a framework in which the data will be
interpreted. Ethical reflection is enhanced when
these two types of investigation are undertaken in
an interdisciplinary and cooperative fashion.
JUDGING GOOD DESCRIPTIVE ETHICS
Like any other literature in medicine, some studies in descriptive bioethics are well done, while others are not. By what criteria might one attempt to
sort out the wheat from the chaff in this field?
The most important point to bear in mind is this:
there are no methods or standards specific to descriptive bioethics. As should be apparent from earlier sections of this chapter, descriptive bioethics is
remarkably interdisciplinary. Each of a multitude
of disciplines contributes a set of methods and criteria for scholarly excellence, applies these methods to the investigation of moral questions, and is
to be judged according to the criteria for scholarly
excellence proper to that discipline. The methods
may be quantitative or qualitative. The methods
may be unique to a particular discipline or shared
by several. The methods may be high tech or low
tech. The work that results is to be judged according to how well it meets the criteria for scholarly
excellence established for studies in its field. Thus,
one judges an anthropological study in medical ethics according to the standards of the discipline of
anthropology, an economic study according to the
standards of the discipline of economics, and a historical study according to the standards of the discipline of history.
Nonetheless, one factor complicates this situation
tremendously. What draws all these scholars together is a common interest in the study of moral
questions. Yet, no one scholar is capable of mastering all of these various disciplines, each with its own
proper methods, technical vocabulary, and standards. Thus, it is critical that these scholars be able
to communicate their research in a way that emphasizes the rigors that are proper to their own discipline, but in a manner that is accessible to a very
diverse audience. This is an extremely difficult challenge. Such communication skills are difficult to
cultivate. Certainly, scholars in bioethics should also
make an effort to understand the rudiments of the
methods of the numerous other disciplines that contribute to the work of descriptive ethics. But no one
can be the master of all of these various trades. The
onus really falls upon each scholar to communicate
research results in jargon-free language without sacrificing the scholarly rigors of the field. This makes
the multidisciplinary character of descriptive ethics research very challenging.
Survey Research
Because survey research is probably the most
common type of research technique in descriptive
ethics, it is probably appropriate to discuss some
general criteria of methodological rigor in survey
research. Surveys can serve to point out areas of dis117
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
agreement, and to point out interesting associations
between particular opinions and certain characteristics of the population under study. More sophisticated survey instruments can try to elicit more
basic underlying attitudes, psychological tendencies,
cultural norms, or stages of moral development.
While even simple opinion survey research can
be important in identifying ethical controversies, it
is not enough simply to ask a few questions and
count up the answers. In assessing the quality of
descriptive ethics research using surveys, one
should be assured that the instrument used in a
given study was well-designed to meet the purposes of the study.
Some of the things to look for in assessing the
quality of survey research, even in ethics, include
the following58: There should be some evidence that
the questions validly reflect the information being
sought, using such methods as testing for face validity before a panel of experts, criterion validity
against some gold standard, construct validity, focus group analysis, or cognitive pretesting. Questions should avoid framing bias, or at least alternate the direction of any acknowledged framing
biases in the questions. Ideally, the exact wording
of the most important question in the study should
be reported in the paper. For example, in a survey
reporting on end of life ethics, one would want to
know if respondents were asked, “Do you support
the right of competent, terminally ill patients to
physician-assisted death?” or whether they were
asked, “Do you think it should be legal for physicians to assist competent, terminally ill patients to
commit suicide?”
The main dependent variable in a survey is more
strongly validated if it is a scale based on several
questions than if it is a single item on a survey. This
is especially important if the researchers are trying
to examine deep underlying attitudes, cultural
norms, psychological tendencies, or stages of moral
reasoning. Reports should note whether these scales
have been checked for internal consistency, using
appropriate statistical tests such as Cronbach’s α (a
test of whether the scale “hangs together” so that
those who answer a question in one way tend to
answer the other questions that form the scale in a
similar, consistent fashion).
Certain factors that are often of interest in descriptive ethics research have been extensively studied by multiple other investigators who have developed valid and reliable instruments. Thus, there
is generally no need for ethics researchers to create
new instruments to measure anxiety, depression,
dementia, confusion, functional status, severity of
illness, or quality of life. There are plenty of scales
available to measure these sorts of factors. While
they are important in descriptive ethics research,
there is no reason to think that they are unique to
descriptive ethics research. One should be wary of
studies that include idiosyncratic measures of wellstudied factors such as dementia, and even more
wary of studies that report on such complex factors on the basis of single questions rather than
scales.
Of course, there may be valid reasons for descriptive ethics researchers to invent their own scales for
these factors in particular circumstances, but the
justification for doing so should be stated clearly.
For example, there could be a priori reasons to suspect that severity of illness scales developed for
unselected patients might differ from severity of
illness scales for patients suffering from chronic,
terminal conditions, leading researchers to develop
and validate their own instruments particular to a
group of patients who generate considerable ethical interest. 59
Surveys should be pilot tested. The research report should describe the nature of the pilot testing.
The pilot study population need not exactly match
the main study population, but they should be similar. For instance, a survey of patients should be piloted among patients, not physicians or medical
social workers.
If the entire population of interest is not surveyed, samples should be random. If this is not
possible, the survey should sample consecutive
subjects or at least sample by some arbitrary method
such as alphabetical order. Basic demographic characteristics of the respondents should be presented.
Response rates should be adequate (generally about
70% for patients, nurses, house officers, or students,
and about 50% for practicing physicians). Some reporting on the characteristics of nonrespondents
should be given to help to support the contention
that there has been little response bias.
Analysis of survey data should follow standard
procedures for statistical testing (eg, χ2 testing for
categorical variables, and t-testing for normally distributed continuous variables). Correlations between outcome variables and sociodemographic,
clinical, or other respondent characteristics should
be reported in a manner that takes into account
multiple associations, using, for instance, multivariable regression models. 60 There should be adequate
numbers of events so that any regression model reported is neither underfitted (too few events to de118
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
tect important associations) nor overfitted (too
many subjects with too few events). There should
be precautions against multicollinearity, interactions, and testing should be performed for “outliers.” An additional problem in using huge data
bases is to interpret the clinical or ethical importance of statistically significant results. To illustrate
this, consider a study that has 10,000 subjects, designed to investigate factors associated with responses to a single question such as, “Do you want
to be resuscitated?” One might find that persons
with lung cancer were 1% more likely to want resuscitation than persons with other cancers, and the
result might be statistically significant. In these
cases, the researchers bear important responsibility for justifying the sample size and for sorting out
the important variables.
Subgroup analyses should reflect genuine preconceived hypotheses or be explicitly acknowledged as an exercise in hypothesis generation.
“Data dredging” for statistically significant results
is an unfortunately common practice. Looking for
anything that might have a P-value < . 05 adversely
affects the quality of the empirical ethics data. Some
associations are bound to appear only by chance
even though these are not actual associations and
are unlikely to be repeatable. The impact of such
spurious associations is minimized if one consistently reports only those associations that were
identified before the research as possible hypotheses. If one intentionally looks for any and all statistically significant associations, some are bound
to appear by chance, and reporting these is irresponsible, raising concerns about the ethical conduct of
the research. Likewise, if the study was not designed to compare subgroups, analysis by subgroups and reporting these results leads to similar
problems.
Interpretation of the data should scrupulously
avoid normative conclusions. It may be interesting,
for instance, if one were to discover that 75% of
physicians do not believe they are bound by the
precepts of the Hippocratic Oath. It would be inappropriate, however, to suggest that this means that
the Hippocratic Oath should no longer be considered normative for medical practice. That may or
may not be the case, depending upon the strength
of various normative arguments.
Carefully conducted survey research in descriptive ethics can be very helpful and can be very interesting. But there must be clear evidence in the
research reports that the survey has been carefully
constructed, administered, analyzed, and interpreted.
Qualitative Research
Descriptive ethics research has given rise to a
new interest in qualitative research in the medical
literature. Many of the most interesting topics in
descriptive ethics are not readily amenable to quantitative research using surveys that consist of a series of closed-ended questions with multiple choice
answers. This is particularly true when it is known
(either by survey or by strong anecdotal evidence)
that a particular subgroup expresses very different
opinions than the rest of the population regarding
a particular moral question. This naturally leads
ethicists to wonder why this is so. A survey with
closed-ended questions must presume that the researchers have a sufficient level of understanding
of the research population that they can create a
range of responses that will capture the opinions of
the respondents. To assume this could be presumptuous. The investigators might not have a clue about
why the research subjects think as they do. In such
a case, there would be little choice except to begin
to ask open-ended questions and to attempt to interpret the responses in a somewhat systematic
fashion.
Qualitative research does not simply consist of a
group of well-intentioned clinicians making up a few
open-ended questions and then presenting their
interpretation of the responses. There are multiple
qualitative and semiquantitative methods that have
been developed over the years in various disciplines
that can help investigators to structure, analyze, interpret, and present qualitative data. These methods
include, but are not limited to, participant-observer
techniques, ethnographic analysis, focus groups,
and Delphi panels of experts.
Participant Observation
Participant observation is a fairly standard technique of sociologists. 16 In this technique, the investigator gains access to the scene under study, becomes an invited part of the system, establishes the
trust of the research subjects, and eventually blends
into the background. Yet, the investigator still maintains an objective observer status, taking notes, and
bringing an outside perspective to the social scene
under study. The length of time devoted to this type
of study is typically extended, not simply reports
based on attending morning rounds one day per
week over a period of 4 to 6 weeks. Participant observation is very labor intensive. Studies that report having utilized this technique are preferred to
119
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
studies that simply report anecdotal experiences or
episodic observations.
Ethnographic Analysis
Ethnographic analysis is another important qualitative research method, borrowed from cultural anthropology. 61 Its application is not limited to far-off
countries, but can be used in American medical contexts. Qualitative studies in descriptive ethics that
adhere to the rigor of this technique can contribute
significantly to medical ethics in a fashion that is
far more reliable than mere anecdotal reporting of
experience. Good ethnographic studies will clearly
define the research question, and will use face-to-face
open-ended interviews as well as participant observation to gather data. These observations will then
be systematically analyzed using specific techniques
such as saturation, triangulation, and “thick description.” Write-ups of these studies will include both clear
descriptions of the methodologies and frank acknowledgment of sources of bias in interpretation of the observations. Studies that include such methodological
rigor can give excellent information about the actual
behavior of healthcare professionals in settings of
bioeth-ical interest, or about bioethical decision making in certain familial or cultural contexts.
Focus Groups
Focus groups are a defined systematic method
for gathering qualitative information in a setting in
which individuals are able to generate ideas by discussing a defined topic in a group setting, able to
respond to the remarks of others in the group. 62
Some focus group methods, such as the Nominal
Group Technique, are designed to avoid dominance
by any particular member and to generate a wide
variety of ideas arranged in a hierarchy of importance. 63 Nominal Group Technique accomplishes
this through a period of silent idea generation followed by round-robin solicitation of these ideas,
and employs secret balloting. Ideas are ranked in
order of importance, and ties are broken by successive rounds of discussion and balloting. Other kinds
of focus groups can be run using techniques to
achieve consensus. There are many opportunities
to make use of such techniques in descriptive bioethics. They can be used, for instance, to generate
ideas about what patients think ought to be understood by a healthy man before giving informed consent to undergo PSA (prostate-specific antigen) testing for prostate cancer. 64
Delphi Panels
A Delphi panel is a formal method for achieving
a consensus opinion among a group of experts regarding a particular topic. 63 This technique is particularly useful when it is not feasible to bring the
members of the group together in a single face-to-face
session. Experts are asked to respond to a question,
to rank their answers, and to explain their answers
in a written fashion. The responses are collated, kept
anonymous, and circulated among the group
through a series of iterations until consensus is
reached. Controversial matters of policy and morals can often be explored using this technique.
Delphi panels have been used, for example, in developing screening guidelines. Their deliberations
are not to be accepted as morally “correct,” but can
be useful.
Communications Research
Another area of interest to the field of descriptive ethics in which qualitative research can play a
particularly important role is the study of the relationship between healthcare professionals and their
patients. In particular, communication between
healthcare professionals and their patients is an area
of intense interest, because this is the most important milieu in which the action of bioethics takes
place. Several new techniques have been developed.
Roter, for instance, has developed a technique,
known as conversational analysis,65 for coding audiotapes of physician–patient interactions. Kaplan
has studied the communication styles of physicians,
particularly examining whether physicians invite
participation by patients in decision making, or
maintain a more traditional “paternalistic” communication style. 66 This is obviously of intense interest to bioethicists who have long championed the
role that patients should play in decision making
regarding their own care.
Multimethod Research
Qualitative research techniques can be utilized
in concert with quantitative survey techniques and
the two styles used either sequentially or simultaneously to hone in on a particular research question from the vantage point of multiple techniques. 67
One method of integrating the two styles of investigation is called “triangulation,” in which data
from a variety of sources can be used to confirm or
build credibility for an analytic assertion or conclu120
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
sion. 68 For example, survey results might suggest
that African-Americans are distrustful of medical
researchers, and these findings might simultaneously be reached by extensive face-to-face interviews with African-Americans who have declined
to participate in research and have stated in large
part that this is because they do not trust the medical establishment. Studies that report using this
combination of techniques are difficult to do, because there is often a gap between quantitatively
oriented and qualitatively oriented researchers. Bioethics appears to be bridging that gap by providing an opportunity for such multimethod research.
Studies using multiple methods can be quite sophisticated. However, multimethod approaches cannot
always be recommended. In certain instances the
amount known about a particular question may be
so minimal that quantitative survey techniques
would have no place. One might really not understand enough to ask the right questions or to frame
meaningful closed-ended responses. In other instances, the background to a question may be so
well known that closed-ended questions are more
appropriate and open-ended interviews or participant observation may be superfluous.
Experimental Methods
Certain studies in descriptive ethics will actually be able to test hypotheses experimentally.
This will be particularly true of studies in which
a normative standard has been developed by
ethical theorists and one wishes to test whether
or not that standard is met in actual clinical practice. Even more significantly a program designed
to promote a particular clinical behavior deemed
worthy of moral approbation or designed to promote some normative standard can be tested by
randomized clinical trials. The ability to introduce the experimental method into bioethics
could, as Thomasma has put it, only enhance the
field. 69 All of the rigorous standards appropriate
to the conduct of excellent randomized clinical
trials in any field of biomedicine should be applied to the assessment of the quality of randomized clinical trials in bioethics. 70 Of course, randomized trials in field studies can be difficult to
conduct, because the intervention generally targets
healthcare professionals rather than patients and it
can be disruptive to the flow of patient care. There
can also be ethical problems in conducting controlled trials in which the program to promote the
ethically preferable behavior is to be withheld from
a control group. Nonetheless, where possible, a randomized controlled trial of a new intervention will
be preferable to a simple before/after cohort study
of a intervention.
Theoretical Framework
Empirical research in sociology, anthropology, and
psychology is often judged on the basis of whether or
not it specifies a particular theoretical framework. This
will be true of empirical research in ethics that is approached from any of these disciplines as well. But
while this is a necessary ingredient for the highest
quality research in descriptive ethics, it is not sufficient. Excellent descriptive ethics research in bioethics will not only specify the theoretical framework
particular to the empirical discipline, it will also explicitly designate the ethical theory that undergirds
the research. Thus, a study on end-of-life decision
making that employs a willingness-to-pay utility
analysis and also acknowledges specifically that the
moral theory undergirding the study is preferencebased utilitarianism is superior to a study in which
the authors do not appear to understand whether or
not they are operating within the framework of any
particular theory of ethics.
As Brody has pointed out, even in the absence of
a specifically acknowledged theoretical orientation,
the investigators must be able to conceptualize the
question from an ethical perspective in order to
conduct solid projects in descriptive ethics. 71 Failure to conceptualize the research adequately from
an ethical point of view will make the study less
ethically illuminating.
Biases in Empirical Research on Ethics
Despite the enormous contributions that empirical studies can make to bioethics, even the
most carefully designed studies will be subject
to certain biases that should be explicitly acknowledged. 72 There will be a bias toward studying more easily measurable phenomena, and so,
for instance, outcomes will seem more prominent
than processes. There will also be a bias towards
studying medical actions rather than omissions.
Omissions might be just as important morally,
but inaction does not show up readily on the
empirical radar scope. Finally, there will be problems with validation. The events of greatest interest will often be ephemeral or intensely private.
121
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
For this reason, empirical projects will often
study responses to hypothetical scenarios or ask
about attitudes. Unfortunately, studies of selfreported attitudes do not necessarily correlate
with actual behaviors.
Detached Disinterest
These concerns about the quality of descriptive
studies in bioethics are important for all readers of
the bioethics literature, not just ethicists. One
should be a critical reader. Some studies will be
published because they appear to support a particular point of view, regardless of their quality. Especially in ethics, a more detached and disinterested
spirit would ideally be expected, but this does not
always obtain in reality. Whether reviewers, editors,
or readers agree with the position that appears to
be supported by the study should not matter. It pays
to recall that no descriptive study ever answers a
normative question. One should be more concerned
about whether the results are of intrinsic interest,
whether the study answers an empirical question
relevant to a normative argument, or tests the
implementation of a normative standard and does
so with methodological rigor. These studies will be
the best, and should make no claims to answer any
normative questions. Regardless of one’s normative
position on the issue under study, one should support quality in the descriptive research.
RESOURCES IN ETHICS
Researchers trained in disciplines such as medical economics, medical sociology, medical anthropology, medical education, and a host of other disciplines often become interested in the study of
moral questions, but are unaware of some important resources in bioethics. These include specific
resources in computer data bases, syllabi, books,
journals, court reports, and newspapers.
National Reference Center for Bioethics Literature
The world’s largest collection devoted solely to
bioethics (21,000 volumes and 300 journals in bioethics and related fields) is housed at the Kennedy
Institute of Ethics, Georgetown University, Washington, DC. The library is supported by the National
Library of Medicine. They produce a thesaurus of
keywords in bioethics searches, an International
Directory of Bioethics Organizations, a Bibliography of Bioethics, Scope Notes reviewing the literature on various topics, a list of new titles in bioethics, and maintain a syllabus exchange catalogue.
The library staff can be reached at 1-800-MEDETHX, and the Internet address (also known as the
URL [universal resource locator]) is http://
www.georgetown.edu/research/kie.
Bioethicsline
The National Reference Center for Bioethics Literature maintains this online resource on behalf of the
National Library of Medicine. It contains all bioethics
references from the Medline data base, but in addition includes bioethics journals, bioethics literature
from journals of philosophy and theology, and relevant court and newspaper articles. Those who
reach the Medline data base of MEDLARS (Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System) via
Internet Grateful Med can access Bioethicsline through
this system. The URL is http://igm.nlm.nih.gov.
One can then choose “Bioethicsline” from the menu.
Bioethics Journals
The following journals are devoted exclusively
or predominantly to the discussion of bioethics:
• Bioethics
• Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics
• HEC Forum (Hospital Ethics Committee) Forum
• Hastings Center Report
• Journal of Clinical Ethics
• Journal of Christian Bioethics
• Journal of Law, Medicine, and Ethics
• Journal of Medical Ethics
• Journal of Medicine and Philosophy
• Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal
• Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics
The Internet
Rapid advances in technology have led to a vast
repository of information available to the interested
individual. Exhibit 4-1 provides a listing of pertinent
resources available on the Internet when this volume
was published. It is anticipated that other websites
will become available in the future as biomedical discoveries fuel increasing interest in bioethics.
122
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
DESCRIPTIVE BIOETHICS AND MILITARY MEDICINE
EXHIBIT 4-1
INTERNET RESOURCES AVAILABLE FOR BIOETHICS RESEARCH
The following is a partial listing of other bioethics resources available via the Internet. Many of these sites
have connections to other useful websites.
American Society for Bioethics and Humanities......... http://www.asbh.org
Buffalo, University of ......... http://wings.buffalo.edu/faculty/research/bioethics/
Center for Research Ethics, Göteborg, Sweden ......... http://www.cre.gu.se
Chicago, University of (McLean Center).......... http://ccme-mac4.bsd.uchicago.edu/index.html
(currently unavailable)
Eubios Ethics Institute ......... http://www.biol.tsukuba.ac.jp/~macer/index.html
German Reference Center for Ethics in the Life Sciences ......... http://www.drze.de/
Medical College of Wisconsin ..........http://www.mcw.edu/bioethics/
National Bioethics Advisory Commission .......... http://bioethics.gov/nbac.html
Pennsylvania, University of (bioethics.net)............ http://www.med.upenn.edu/bioethics/index.shtml
Descriptive bioethics in military medicine is a
wide open field, ripe for investigation. There have
been very few published papers in descriptive ethics that have come from military sources or have
investigated issues of particular interest to military
biomedical ethics. There have been few empirical
studies of ethical issues in the pages of the journal,
Military Medicine, aside from a few surveys of ethics committees. 73,74 Yet, some of the ethical issues
that have been addressed in a more theoretical fashion would, in fact, be amenable to empirical research. For instance, battlefield euthanasia is discussed, but it is not known how often this is thought
about, requested, or performed. Issues about informed consent for research in military settings, the
particularities that make it more difficult to avoid
coercion and manipulation, the problems of balancing risks and benefits of prescribing experimental
antidotes for chemical warfare, have all been discussed. The normative aspects of these sorts of issues occasionally receive prominent discussion,75
yet it would appear that there have been no empirical studies about informed consent in military
settings.
The recent Presidential Commission on Radiation
Experimentation conducted a great number of empirical surveys regarding military medical experiments and informed consent in the past. 76 The picture painted by these data is not rosy. But very little
is known about the present state of affairs, and this
would also seem a ripe area for empirical research
in bioethics in a military setting.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter I have presented a broad overview of a rather extensive field—empirical research
in bioethics. I have distinguished these studies in
descriptive ethics from studies in normative ethics
and metaethics. I have described some of the myriad
disciplines that make contributions to descriptive
ethics, and some of the techniques that are used. I
have outlined some norms governing the proper
relationship between normative ethics and descriptive ethics, particularly regarding the important rule
that normative inferences cannot be validly drawn
from descriptive studies in themselves. I have also
outlined some of the indicators of scholarly quality
in descriptive ethics studies, emphasizing that these
indicators are largely the indicators of the discipline
that is being employed in the investigation. Finally,
I have listed a series of resources in bioethics for
those who might be interested in undertaking de123
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
scriptive bioethics research.
Empirical research in bioethics is an exciting,
dynamic, and growing field of investigation. Pursued along with normative ethics in a truly synergistic fashion, it offers extraordinary research potential that neither approach could fulfill alone.
Descriptive ethics research is among the few academic settings in which truly interdisciplinary
study is flourishing. It would be wonderful if the
flavor of this interdisciplinary field were enriched
further by adding more military studies to the descriptive bioethics menu.
REFERENCES
1.
Aristotle. Nichomachean Ethics. Irwin T, trans. Indianapolis, Ind: Hackett; 1985.
2.
Frankena WK. Ethics. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1973: 4–5.
3.
Sugarman J, Sulmasy DP, eds. Methods in Medical Ethics. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press; 2000.
4.
Mead M. Growing Up in New Guinea: A Comparative Study of Primitive Education. London: Routledge; 1931.
5.
Engelhardt HT Jr. The Foundations of Bioethics. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986: 228–236.
6.
Carrese JA, Rhodes LA. Western bioethics on the Navajo reservation: Benefit or harm? JAMA. 1995;274(10):826–829.
7.
Orona CJ, Koenig BA, Davis AJ. Cultural aspects of nondisclosure. Camb Q Healthc Ethics. 1994;3(3):338–346.
8.
Katz P. The Scalpel’s Edge: The Culture of Surgeons. Boston: Allyn & Bacon; 1999.
9.
Levinson W, Roter DL, Mullooly JP, Dull VT, Frankel RM. Physician–patient communication: The relationship
with malpractice claims among primary care physicians and surgeons. JAMA. 1997;277(7):553–559.
10.
Christakis NA. The ethical design of an AIDS vaccine trial in Africa. Hastings Cent Rep. 1988;18(3):31–37.
11.
Pence GE. Classic Cases in Medical Ethics. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1995: 175–176.
12.
Fox RC, Swazey JP. The Courage to Fail: A Social View of Organ Transplants and Dialysis. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press; 1974.
13.
Mizrahi T. Getting Rid of Patients: Contradictions in the Socialization of Physicians. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press; 1986.
14.
Muller JH. Shades of blue: The negotiation of limited codes by medical residents. Soc Sci Med. 1992;34(8):885–898.
15.
Lidz CW, Meisel A. Informed consent and the structure of medical care. In: President’s Commission for the Study
of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research. Making Health Care Decisions. Vol. II. Empirical Studies of Informed Consent. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1982: 317–410.
16.
Jorgensen DL. Participant Observation: A Methodology for Human Studies. Newbury Park, Calif: Sage Publications; 1989.
17.
Lo B, Schroeder SA. Frequency of ethical dilemmas in a medical inpatient service. Arch Intern Med.
1981;141(8):1062–1064.
18.
The SUPPORT Principal Investigators. A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients:
The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments (SUPPORT). JAMA.
1995;274(20):1591–1598.
19.
Wenger NS, Pearson ML, Desmond KA, et al. Epidemiology of do-not-resuscitate orders: Disparity by age,
diagnosis, gender, race, and functional impairment. Arch Intern Med. 1995;155(19):2056–2062.
124
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
20.
van der Maas PJ, van der Wal G, Haverkate I, et al. Euthanasia, physician-assisted suicide, and other medical
practices involving the end of life in the Netherlands, 1990–1995. N Engl J Med. 1996;335(22):1699–1705.
21.
Ware JE Jr, Bayliss MS, Rogers WH, Kosinski M, Tarlov AR. Differences in 4-year health outcomes for elderly
and poor, chronically ill patients treated in HMO and fee-for-service systems. Results from the Medical Outcomes Study. JAMA. 1996;276(13):1039–1047.
22.
Sulmasy DP, Lehmann L, Levine DM, Faden RR. Patients’ perceptions of the quality of informed consent for
common medical procedures. J Clin Ethics. 1994;5(3):189–194.
23.
Self DJ, Wolinsky FD, Baldwin DC Jr. The effect of teaching medical ethics on medical students’ moral reasoning. Acad Med. 1989;64(12):755–759.
24.
Self DJ, Skeel JD, Jecker NS. A comparison of the moral reasoning of physicians and clinical medical ethicists.
Acad Med. 1993;68(11):852–855.
25.
Gilligan C. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1982.
26.
Sulmasy DP, Geller G, Levine DM, Faden R. Medical house officers’ knowledge, attitudes, and confidence
regarding medical ethics. Arch Intern Med. 1990;150(12):2509–2513.
27.
Lerman C, Narod S, Schulman K, et al. BRCA1 testing in families with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer: A
prospective study of patient decision making and outcomes. JAMA. 1996;275(24):1885–1892.
28.
Nelson KE, Celentano DD, Eiumtrakol S, et al. Changes in sexual behavior and a decline in HIV infection
among young men in Thailand. N Engl J Med. 1996;335(5):297–303.
29.
Sulmasy DP, Terry PB, Weisman CS, et al. The accuracy of substituted judgments in patients with terminal
diagnoses. Ann Intern Med. 1998;128:621–629.
30.
Blendon RJ, Szalay US, Knox RA. Should physicians aid their patients in dying? The public perspective. JAMA.
1992;267(19):2658–2662.
31.
Beauchamp TL. Philosophical Ethics: An Introduction to Moral Philosophy. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1982: 336–379.
32.
Hume D. In: Selby-Bigge LA, ed. A Treatise of Human Nature. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press of Oxford University Press; 1978: 468–470.
33.
Searle JR. Deriving ‘ought’ from ‘is.’ In: Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. London: Cambridge
University Press; 1969: 175–198.
34.
MacIntyre AC. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. 2nd ed. Notre Dame, Ind: University of Notre Dame Press; 1984.
35.
Freeman VG, Rathore SS, Weinfurt KP, Schulman KA, Sulmasy DP. Lying for patients: Physician deception of
third-party payers. Arch Intern Med. 1999;159:2263–2270.
36.
Aquinas T. Summa Theologiae. I-II, q. 94, a. 4, c.
37.
Finnis J. Natural Law and Natural Rights. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980.
38.
Silverman HJ, Tuma P, Schaeffer MH, Singh B. Implementation of the patient self-determination act in a hospital setting: An initial evaluation. Arch Intern Med. 1995;155(5):502–510.
39.
Berlakovich GA, Steininger R, Herbst F, Barlan M, Mittlbock M, Mulbacher F. Efficacy of liver transplantation
for alcoholic cirrhosis with respect to recidivism and compliance. Transplantation. 1994;58(5):560–565.
40
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1994: 150–151.
125
The Science Behind the Art: Empirical Research on Medical Ethics
41.
Oken J. What to tell cancer patients. JAMA. 1961;175:1120–1128.
42.
Alfidi RJ. Informed consent: A study of patient reaction. JAMA. 1971;216(8):1325–1329.
43.
Novack DH, Plumer R, Smith RL, Ochitill H, Morrow GR, Bennett JM. Changes in physicians’ attitudes toward
telling the cancer patient. JAMA. 1979;241(9):897–900.
44.
Kamisar Y. Are laws against assisted suicide unconstitutional? Hastings Cent Rep. 1993;23(3):32–41.
45.
Kass LR. Neither for love nor money: Why doctors must not kill. Public Interest. 1989;198(9):25–46.
46.
Hendin H. Seduced by Death: Doctors, Patients, and the Dutch Cure. New York: WW Norton; 1997: 53.
47.
Lifton RJ. The Nazi Doctors: Medical Killing and the Psychology of Genocide. New York: Basic Books; 1986.
48.
Gomez CF. Regulating Death: Euthanasia and the Case of the Netherlands. New York: Free Press; 1991.
49.
Sulmasy DP, Linas BP, Gold K, Schulman K. Physician resource use and willingness to participate in assisted
suicide. Arch Intern Med. 1998;158(9):974–978.
50.
Avila D. Is the constitution a suicide pact? Duquesne Law Rev. 1996;35(1):201–259.
51.
Buchanan AE, Brock DW. Deciding for Others: The Ethics of Surrogate Decision Making. New York: Cambridge
University Press; 1989.
52.
Seckler AB, Meier DE, Mulvihill M, Paris BE. Substituted judgment: How accurate are proxy predictions? Ann
Intern Med. 1991;115(2):92–98.
53.
Uhlmann RF, Pearlman RA, Cain KC. Physicians’ and spouses’ predictions of elderly patients’ resuscitation
preferences. J Gerontol. 1988;43(5):M115–121.
54.
Zweibel NR, Cassel CK. Treatment choices at the end of life: A comparison of decisions by older patients and
their physician-selected proxies. Gerontologist. 1989;29(5):615–621.
55.
Rescher N. Does ought imply can? In: Ethical Idealism: An Inquiry Into the Nature and Function of Ideals. Berkeley:
University of California Press; 1987: 26–54.
56.
Jonsen AR, Toulmin S. The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral Reasoning. Berkeley: University of California
Press; 1988.
57.
Sulmasy DP, Terry PB, Faden RR, Levine DM. Long-term effects of ethics education on the quality of care for
patients who have do-not-resuscitate orders. J Gen Intern Med. 1994;9(11):622–626.
58.
Neuman WL. Social Research Methods. 3rd ed. Boston: Allyn & Bacon; 1997: 227–269.
59.
Knaus WA, Harrell FE Jr, Lynn J, et al. The SUPPORT prognostic model: Objective estimates of survival for
seriously ill hospitalized adults. Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of
Treatments. Ann Intern Med. 1995;122(3):191–203.
60.
Concato J, Feinstein AR, Holford TR. The risk of determining risk with multivariable models. Ann Intern Med.
1993;118(3):201–210.
61.
Ventres WB, Frankel RM. Ethnography: A stepwise approach for primary care researchers. Fam Med.
1996;28(1):52–56.
62.
Morgan DL. Focus Groups as Qualitative Research. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications; 1997.
126
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
63.
Delbecq AL, Van de Ven AH, Gustafson DH. Group Techniques for Program Planning: A Guide to Nominal Group
and Delphi Processes. Middleton, Wisc: Green Briar Press; 1986.
64.
Chan EC, Sulmasy DP. What should men know about prostate-specific antigen screening before giving informed consent? Am J Med. 1998;105(4):266–274.
65.
Roter DL, Stewart M, Putnam SM, Lipkin M Jr, Stiles W, Inui TS. Communication patterns of primary care
physicians. JAMA. 1997;277(4):350–356.
66.
Kaplan SH, Greenfield S, Gandek B, Rogers WH, Ware JE Jr. Characteristics of physicians with participatory
decision-making styles. Ann Intern Med. 1996;124(5):497–504.
67.
Stange KC, Miller WL, Crabtree BF, O’Connor PJ, Zyzanski SJ. Multimethod research: Approaches for integrating qualitative and quantitative methods. J Gen Intern Med. 1994;9(5):278–282.
68.
Breitmayer BJ, Ayres L, Knafl KA. Triangulation in qualitative research: Evaluation of completeness and confirmation purposes. Image J Nurs Sch. 1993;25(3):237–243.
69.
Thomasma DC. Empirical methodology in medical ethics [editorial]. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1985;33(5):313–314.
70.
Meinert CL. Clinical Trials: Design, Conduct, and Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986.
71.
Brody BA. Assessing empirical research in bioethics. Theor Med. 1993;14(3):211–219.
72.
Pearlman RA, Miles SH, Arnold RM. Contributions of empirical research to medical ethics. Theor Med.
1993;14(3):197–210.
73.
Carter BS. Medical ethics committee—a survey of Army hospitals. Mil Med. 1988;153(18):426–429.
74.
Carter BS. A survey of Army clinicians on hospital ethics committees. Mil Med. 1989;154(8):392–394.
75.
Annas GJ. Changing the consent rules for Desert Storm. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(11):770–773.
76.
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996.
