221
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
Chapter 8
JUST WAR DOCTRINE AND THE
INTERNATIONAL LAW OF WAR
WILLIAM V. O’BRIEN, PHD*; AND ANTHONY C. AREND, PHD†
INTRODUCTION
THE HISTORIC RELATION OF JUST WAR DOCTRINE AND THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF WAR
War-Decision Law (Jus ad Bellum)
War-Conduct Law (Jus in Bello)
CONTEMPORARY LEGAL AND MORAL RESTRAINTS ON RECOURSE TO
ARMED FORCE
International War-Decision Law and the United Nations Charter
The War-Decision Law of Just War Doctrine
CONTEMPORARY LEGAL AND MORAL RESTRAINTS ON WAR CONDUCT
The Principles of International War-Conduct Law
Some Specific Areas of International War-Conduct Law
The War-Conduct Law in Just War Doctrine
APPLICATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF WAR AND JUST WAR
DOCTRINE
CONCLUSION
*Lieutenant Colonel, Civil Affairs, United States Army Reserve (Retired); Professor of Government Emeritus (Retired), Georgetown University, 4000 Reservoir Road, Washington, DC 20056
†Professor of Government and Adjunct Professor of Law, Georgetown University, 4000 Reservoir Road, Washington, DC 20056
222
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
John Singer Sargent
Gassed
Oil on canvas, 1919
Toward the end of the First World War, the British War Memorials Committee commissioned Sargent to make a large
painting for a projected Hall of Remembrance. Sargent spent several months at the western front in France, making
preliminary sketches and watercolors. The subject he ultimately chose was the effects of the weapon mustard gas,
which blinded its victims and produced blistering skin and bleeding lungs. Here, in a painting that contrasts sharply
with the glamour and carefree mood of most of his earlier art, the line of wounded men stumbling toward a first-aid
station was directly inspired by scenes Sargent observed at the front. At the same time, he made his image more
powerful and timeless by its visual reference to processions of figures on ancient Greek and Roman sculptural friezes.
Caption: The Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, from their 27 June–26 September 1999, Sargent exhibition.
Artwork: Courtesy of the Imperial War Museum, London.
223
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
INTRODUCTION
There have been two concepts of war over the
centuries. One holds that war may be pursued without moral or legal restraints that would conflict with
the exigencies of military necessity. It is summed
up in General William Tecumseh Sherman’s pronouncement that “War is hell.”1(pp126–127) The other
contends that war is limited by the requirements of
morality and law, notwithstanding the claims of
military necessity. This latter concept is the basis
for just war doctrine and other sources of moral
guidance as well as for the international law of war.
History, old and recent, demonstrates that the first
concept (“necessity knows no law” and “all is fair in
love and war”) has more often than not predominated.
Nevertheless, the quest for moral and legal restraints
on war is a very old one that continues in the face
of bitter conflicts that are rendered all the more
destructive by modern weaponry and technology.
To understand moral and legal limits on war, one
must begin with the understanding that their object is to achieve something that has always been
very difficult, namely, requiring a belligerent to relinquish perceived advantages. To be sure, not all
moral and legal limits on belligerent conduct clash
with true military necessity. Many of these limitations are mutually beneficial to the belligerents.
Moreover, violations of moral and legal norms may
ultimately contribute to defeat rather than victory.
But, absent any world authority to enforce moral
and legal norms, just war doctrine and the international law of war become relevant only when
belligerents respect and enforce these norms themselves. Clearly, then, the first step toward making
just war doctrine and the international law of war
practical guides to belligerent behavior is to understand their character and content.
THE HISTORIC RELATION OF JUST WAR DOCTRINE AND THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF WAR
Warfare in ancient civilizations of which there is
written record was, on the whole, total and brutal.
Defeated enemies were often exterminated or, at
best, reduced to slavery. Some moral and legal
norms, however, did develop. Because they usually
had both a moral and practical basis rooted in evolving custom, it is not useful at this point to distinguish what became just war doctrine from the international law of war.
Most of the limits on warfare did not relate to
the conduct of combat but to the relations between
belligerents such as the exchange of envoys and
their protection, establishment of truces, and negotiation of treaties. A recurring concept in Classical
Antiquity was that of the inviolability of certain
sacred places. This concept, however, was mainly
limited to belligerents of the same general religious
persuasion, that is, among Greeks. 2 The most significant rule of war that is found in Classical Antiquity
in the Middle East and Greece was the prohibition
against poisoning wells or destroying oases, as it
was considered to be a crime against all mankind
to destroy a source of water. Naturally, this prohibition was not always observed but it established a
norm that is applicable to today’s world where there
are so many appalling means of destroying and
fouling the earth. 3(p209)
Western just war doctrine has its origins in Classical Antiquity in the Roman bellum justum (just
war) that, while based on pagan religion, set the
example of seeking the approval of the gods before
initiating a war. 4(pp41–42) Bellum justum appears to
have had little interest in the conduct of a war once
launched and Roman combat practices were notoriously brutal. 3(p203) In contrast, during this same period, early Christianity was marked by pacifism, in
part due to Christian emphasis on nonviolence. Another important reason for Christian pacifism was
that Christians were persecuted or, at best, barely
tolerated, had little stake in Roman society, and
avoided military service because it involved submission to pagan religion and was characterized by
widespread immorality. 5
Christianity was finally accepted in Roman society after several centuries of marginal influence. The
first significant step into mainstream Roman life
came in the early fourth century AD. After his victory at Milvian Bridge (AD 312), which he attributed
to divine intervention, Emperor Constantine became favorable to Christianity. By AD 380 the Emperor Theodosius I declared Christianity the Roman
Empire’s official religion. Christians increasingly
found their fate tied to Rome, which by then was
periodically invaded by barbarians. There was a
need to formulate moral doctrine to deal with the
role of Christians in the defense of Rome.
This task was taken up by St. Augustine (AD 354–
430). He developed a Christian just war doctrine
that, like the pagan bellum justum, focused mainly
on the decision to go to war, with relatively little
224
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
attention to the ensuing conduct of war. Indeed,
Augustine’s emphasis on the rectitude of the just
belligerent and the sinful character of the unjust
belligerent can be interpreted to give the just party
a very wide discretion in its war conduct. 6
Christian just war doctrine is most relevant to
the West because it influenced not only moral teaching but also the development of the international
law of war. It must be recognized, however, that
various forms of just war doctrine developed in
other cultures, most notably in Islam. There, too,
the emphasis tended to be on establishing the justice of the war rather than limiting its conduct, although some moral and legal limits did develop. 7–11
From these early beginnings gradually emerged
two sources of moral and legal guidance about war.
One part, dealing with recourse to war, was traditionally known as the jus ad bellum, or war-decision
law. The other part, attempting to regulate and mitigate the conduct of war, was known as the jus in
bello, or war conduct-law. This division remains in
both contemporary just war doctrine and the international law of war.
In order to understand the relation of just war
doctrine to the modern international law of war, it
is worthwhile to trace their respective historic development and relationship. The following account
focuses on developments in Western civilization
because contemporary international law evolved
from the emerging European states and spread worldwide as a result of their imperialistic expansion.
War-Decision Law (Jus ad Bellum)
In the 7 or 8 centuries following the efforts of St.
Augustine, normative restrictions on recourse to
armed force continued to be found almost exclusively in the moral teachings of Christian just war
doctrine, canon law, and Church-imposed regimes.
A variety of Christian theologians and philosophers
contributed to these moral prescriptions but the
most important of them was St. Thomas Aquinas
(1224–1274). 12 St. Thomas began his analysis of war
from the standpoint of the necessity of protecting
political society. Assuming, as had Aristotle, that
man was a political and social animal and that political society was a necessity and a good in itself,
St. Thomas concluded that such a society could
rightfully be protected against aggression. Defense
of the society, however, involved killing and the
presumption was against killing. St. Thomas held
that this presumption could be overcome by meeting three conditions.
These conditions, constituting war-decision law
(jus ad bellum), were:
1.
Competent authority: War must be waged
under the public authority of the political
society;
2.
Just cause: War must waged either in legitimate self-defense or to correct and punish
grievous injuries; and
3.
Right intention: War must only be pursued
in order to achieve the ends of the just
cause, without hatred or desire of vengeance, and in order to establish a just and
lasting peace.
Aside from some very particularistic rules of war
conduct (eg, to protect clergy and religious pilgrims), St. Thomas’ just war doctrine was limited
to war-decision law. However, the condition of right
intention, if respected, should limit the conduct of
a just war. 13
Later Scholastics such as Francisco de Vitoria
(1483–1586) and Francisco Suarez (1548–1617) developed the war-decision law, jus ad bellum, as well
as war-conduct law, jus in bello. 14 Their treatment of
war-conduct law owed much to the customary principles and practices of the Age of Chivalry and contemporary belligerents. Shortly after Suarez’ death
in 1617, the destructive Thirty Years War (1618–
1648) contributed to the emergence of a European
law of nations, built in large part on the just war
tradition. The most notable contributor to this development was the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius
whose work, De Jure Belli ac Pacis, written in 1625
in the midst of the slaughter, is considered the seminal international law text. 15(pp25–35)
Grotius’ work combined natural law concepts
similar to those underlying the Christian just war
tradition with prescriptions claimed to be derived
from the customary practice of states. In the years
that followed the Thirty Years War both sources
continued to influence the law of nations. With the
rise of the secular, sovereign state, however, the
war-decision concepts of just war doctrine declined
in importance and finally disappeared in the law of
nations. By the 18th century, there was little disposition to justify or condemn recourse to war as just or
unjust. War was simply considered a fact of international politics. Morality was divorced from law and
the law of nations was only concerned with the legal consequences of war. This was the case throughout the 19th century and at the outset of World War I.
The appalling magnitude of the destruction of
World War I engendered a widespread reaction
against war as an instrument of foreign policy. Part
of that reaction took the form of the war-guilt clause
in the Versailles Treaty that blamed Germany for
the war, surely unfair and certainly at odds with
225
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
the legal situation of 1914 when hostilities began
and there was no general prohibition of recourse to
armed force. A more enlightened—if overly optimistic—result of this same reaction against war was
the establishment of the League of Nations and the
effort to “outlaw” war.
The war-decision regime of the League of Nations essentially prohibited recourse to armed force
except when all peaceful means of settling a conflict had been exhausted, or in self-defense, or when
the League itself took armed sanctions against an
aggressor. The League Covenant was supposedly
strengthened by a number of conventions signed
in the 1920s and 1930s. The most important was the
Kellogg-Briand Pact of 27 August 1928 whereby the
Parties “condemn recourse to war for the solution
of international controversies, and renounce it as
an instrument of national policy in their relations
with one another.”16(p912) Most states in the world
adhered to the Kellogg-Briand Pact.
These efforts to change the international system
failed in the 1930s. The structure of the League of
Nations and the failure of the leading democratic
powers to stand up to German, Japanese, and Italian aggression in the late 1930s rendered the Covenant, the Kellogg-Briand Pact, and the other conventions worthless. Recognizing this, the victorious
powers of World War II sought to achieve what the
League had failed to do by establishing a United
Nations Organization (UNO) with better arrangements for enforcing its laws and the expectation that
the wartime allies would continue to cooperate to
maintain the peace.
The Cold War thwarted hopes that the United
Nations (UN) could improve on the League of Nations’ record with regard to enforcing the peace.
With the end of the Cold War, these hopes have been
revived but, as will be discussed, the effectiveness
of United Nations war-decision law is still problematic. Meanwhile, the proliferation of international
and civil conflicts and, in particular, the threat of
nuclear war, have engendered a revival of just war
doctrine in the West. Just war doctrine has increasingly been considered as a source of normative
guidance complementary to the international law
of war, both war-decision and war-conduct law.
War-Conduct Law (Jus in Bello)
In just war doctrine as well as the international
law of war, principles and rules governing war-conduct have historically reflected belligerent practice.
In the past, restraints on war-conduct were inspired
by a mixture of morality, chivalry, and professional
ethics applied in the light of the characteristics and
pragmatic aspects of warfare. The state of war-conduct law obviously reflected the nature of weaponry, as well as the magnitude of a conflict. Thus,
in a comparatively total war between whole societies mobilized to support huge armies, as in the two
World Wars, observance of the laws of war is difficult. In limited wars, with limited ends and means,
war-conduct law is more likely to be respected. It
was in an era of limited wars fought by small professional armies that international war-conduct law
was developed in the 18th and 19th centuries.
By 1863 it was possible for Professor Francis
Lieber, a German immigrant to the United States,
to prepare for President Lincoln a war-conduct code
for the regulation of the Union Armies. This code
(which became known as the Lieber Code) reflected
the contemporary state of war-conduct law in Europe. Following other efforts at codification of customary law, the Hague Conventions (II of 1899; IV
of 1907) became the basis for the contemporary law
of land warfare. However, efforts to codify rules for
naval warfare failed.
Following World War I, attempts to confront new
forms of warfare met with mixed results. The 1925
Geneva Gas Protocol prohibited the use of chemical
and biological means and remains the principal source
of international law on the subject. The 1928 Geneva
Convention added to the provisions for protection of
prisoners of war in the 1906 Geneva and 1907 Hague
Conventions. However, efforts to restrict submarine
warfare and aerial bombardment were unsuccessful.
The four 1949 Geneva Conventions dealt comprehensively with protection of the wounded and
sick on land and on sea, prisoners of war, and civilians under belligerent occupation. They remain a
major source of war-conduct law. (Exhibit 8-1 explains the nomenclature of international law.) The
1925 Geneva Protocol’s prohibition against use of
biological weapons was reinforced by the 1972 Bacteriological (Biological) Convention. Two 1977 Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, one for international conflicts and one for civil conflicts, address a wide range of war-conduct issues but their
status is questionable because of lack of ratification
by key states, notably the United States. A 1980 Weapons Convention regulates but does not prohibit the
use of napalm and other controversial means.
The advent of weapons of mass destruction—
chemical, biological, and nuclear—and strategies
aimed at attacking the civilian infrastructure of a belligerent have forced reconsideration of traditional
war-conduct principles of proportionality and discrimination (ie, the immunity of civilians and civilian
targets from direct intentional attack). These principles
are common to just war doctrine and the international
226
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
EXHIBIT 8-1
THE NOMENCLATURE OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
International law is created through two primary methods: treaties and custom. Treaties are written international agreements. They consitutute the “black-letter law” of international law. Treaties may be called many
things: conventions, agreements, pacts, protocols, charters, covenants, or accords. At times, treaties are given
names that correspond to the place in which they were negotiated, such as the Treaty of Versailles. At other
times, they are given names based on the subject matter addressed by the treaty, such as the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty. Occasionally, they may even be given a name derived from the names of the principal
negotiators, such as the Kellogg-Briand Pact. Frequently, treaties will be cited with the date of their conclusion
in their title, such as the 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol. It is not unusual for a major international conference to be
convened to produce several treaties. For example, the 1907 Hague Peace Conference produced a number of
treaties, such as the Hague Convention on the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes. Finally, it should
be noted that at times a subsequent treaty is concluded to expand upon a previous international agreement. In
1977, for example, a conference was held to formulate two protocols that elaborated upon the 1948 Geneva
Conventions. Hence, the literature might refer to Protocol Additional to Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949 and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts simply as Protocol I of 1977.
law of war and will be explored in more detail in a
subsequent section of this chapter. The excesses of two
global wars, as well as subsequent conflicts, have
badly eroded the legal status of these principles. The
revival of just war doctrine has focused on this phenomenon in modern conventional wars and, particularly, in nuclear postures. In summary, efforts to develop effective legal and moral restraints on war-conduct have continued and, at least in the West, have
been taken seriously. But the challenges of modern
warfare at all levels to war-conduct limitations continue to mount, requiring renewed determination on
the part of belligerents to reconcile military necessity
with legal and moral prescriptions.
CONTEMPORARY LEGAL AND MORAL RESTRAINTS ON RECOURSE TO ARMED FORCE
Contemporary restraints on recourse to armed
force are delineated by international war-decision
law and the United Nations Charter. The war-decision law, in turn, derives from just war doctrine.
Each of these will be discussed in detail.
International War-Decision Law and the United
Nations Charter
Contemporary restraints on recourse to armed
force rely on provisions and assumptions in international law as delineated in the United Nations
Charter. There are, however, specific exceptions to
those provisions as detailed in Articles 42 and 51 of
the Charter. This chapter will explore the provisions
of those articles as well as the history of the United
Nations intervention in foreign affairs.
Provisions and Assumptions
International war-decision law centers on the
provisions of the United Nations Charter as they
have been interpreted and applied by the nations.
It is important to acknowledge the assumptions that
underlie these provisions.
The first assumption is that development of
peaceful means of conflict resolution by the United
Nations, other international organizations, and the
states of the international system will render war
unnecessary. The second assumption is that collective security, based on a substantial monopoly of
force in the international community, will deter
threats to the peace and terminate them effectively
when they occur. The third assumption is that the
main threats to peace are posed by interstate conventional wars, such as World War I and World War II.
Obviously these assumptions have not proved
realistic. Deep-seated animosities arising from national, ethnic, religious, and ideological sources
have shown many modern conflicts to be intractable. The so-called “machinery for peace” assembled in the League of Nations period and supposedly strengthened in the UN era has failed to
resolve innumerable modern conflicts.
Moreover, efforts to develop collective security
arrangements to enforce the peace were doomed
227
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
during the Cold War and current attempts to realize the hopes of the UN Charter remain problematic. Finally, although interstate conventional wars
remain a serious threat to the peace, most contemporary conflicts have been civil wars, often complicated by multiple interventions, usually fought
in some combination of guerrilla/counterinsurgency and conventional warfare. 17(pp118–119)
Accordingly, there is a considerable gap between
the international war-decision law implied by a literal reading of the UN Charter and a realistic examination of belligerent practice since 1945. The key
provision of the Charter is Article 2(4), which prohibits “the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations.” This provision expands upon the restrictions on the recourse to force
contained in the League of Nations and the KelloggBriand Pact. Written in 1945, the UN Charter anticipates the count of Crimes Against Peace of the
Nuremberg and Tokyo war crimes trials.
Exceptions to the Provisions: Articles 42 and 51
Under the law of the UN Charter there are only
two explicit exceptions to this general prohibition
of recourse to the threat or use of armed force that
are still applicable. The first is the use of armed force
by the Security Council under Article 42 as an enforcement measure if the council determines that
there has been a threat to the peace, breach of the
peace, or act of aggression. The Charter also provides under Article 51 for utilization of a regional
organization by the Security Council in enforcement
actions.
There has only been one occasion when the Security Council has been able to carry out an enforcement action in the sense of Article 42. This was the
case in the 1991 Persian Gulf War. 17(pp88–90) Although
the Korean War18 is often viewed as a UN war, UN
participation was not based on Security Council
authority. Rather it was a war of collective self-defense in which the General Assembly, which does
not have the authority to order enforcement action,
recommended, in the “Uniting for Peace Resolution” of 7 October 1950, that UN members assist in
the defense of South Korea. Given the extraordinary
circumstances of the Gulf War (eg, the clear and
cruel nature of Iraq’s aggression, the rare unanimity of the permanent members of the Security Council who have the veto, and the willingness of the
United States and its allies to mount a major military operation to end the threat to peace), it may
turn out that this enforcement action is unique.
Whether other Security Council enforcement actions will be forthcoming is very hard to predict.
The second exception to the general prohibition
of use of force established in Article 2(4) of the
United Nations Charter is for actions taken in individual and collective self-defense, recognized as an
“inherent right” in Article 51. This right is limited
by the requirements that its invocation be reported
to the Security Council and that it should only be
in effect “until the Security Council has taken the
measures necessary to maintain international
peace.” The exception of self-defense has been the
principal justification advanced for recourse to
armed force in the UN era.
The problems of the legal justification of individual and collective self-defense are numerous.
Article 51 provides for self-defense “if an armed
attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations.” Clearly the model for “armed attack” occurring is a conventional attack across the border of a
state. But many modern conflicts take the form of
indirect aggression through infiltration of armed
bands, indigenous enemies of the target state’s regime, or forces of the aggressors. Sometimes, as in
the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, an armed attack is pending, there is a clear and present danger, and anticipatory self-defense in the form of preemptive war
may be justified. 19(pp71–79) Article 51’s reference to “a
Member of the United Nations” is misleading. Selfdefense is an “inherent” right, recognized, not created, by the Charter. There is no question that a
nonmember state, such as South Korea in 1950 and
South Vietnam from 1954 to 1975, has a right of individual and collective self-defense. 15(pp417–419),19(p72)
United Nations’ Intervention in Foreign Affairs
Modern wars are often greatly complicated by
foreign interventions. The UN Charter does not deal
with such interventions, except in Article 2(7),
which denies the UN itself the right “to intervene
in matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state,” although this prohibition
is not “to prejudice the application of enforcement
measures under Chapter VII.” In other words, in
the absence of Charter provisions on military and
other intervention by states, customary international
law must be applied. This law is extremely confused
and controversial but there is warrant for stating
that there is a general presumption against military
intervention. In practice, four exceptions20(pp167–174)
to the general principle of nonintervention have
received some support:
228
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
1.
intervention by treaty right;
2.
intervention on the request of an incumbent
government, often justified as counter-intervention in response to previous intervention into a civil war by a hostile state (eg,
the United States intervention in Vietnam);
3.
intervention to protect the lives of nationals and other aliens in clear and present
danger because of civil strife or collapse
of law and order (eg, Belgian intervention
in Stanleyville, Congo, in 1963); and
4.
humanitarian intervention to protect a
people from its own government or from
collapse of civil authority (eg, Somalia in
1992 and 1993, and Kosovo in 1999).
In summary, under the UN charter framework,
international war-decision law requires that recourse to armed force be justified either as enforcement action ordered by the UN Security Council or
as individual or collective self-defense. Military
intervention in the domestic affairs of another nation may also be justified on one of the four bases
listed above.
However, what may be legally permissible under international war-decision law may not be morally permissible or even politically and militarily
prudent. For example, there is no doubt that the
breakup of Yugoslavia was caused by the aggression of Serbia and Serbian rebels supported by the
Serbian government against Croatia and Bosnia.
Still, the Security Council was never able to authorize and organize true enforcement actions against
these threats to the peace. No state volunteered to
join Croatia or Bosnia in collective self-defense.
While Serbian “ethnic cleansing” was clearly genocidal, no state or international organization volunteered for humanitarian intervention. There were
clear legal arguments for initial intervention in the
conflict by the United Nations, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), or any state or group
of states. Still, the victims of aggression and genocide were left to resist alone, aided marginally by
relief efforts and occasional cease-fires and truces.
Military intervention was legally justified but not
attempted.
This failure to apply force against aggression and
genocide may be explained simply by a failure of
will on the part of the states and organizations that
had the legal right to intervene. However, a legal
right may not necessarily be a moral right. More is
required than assurance of legal permissibility to
launch military operations that promise to be very
destructive to all involved. For further normative
and policy guidance it is wise to turn to modern
just war doctrine.
The War-Decision Law of Just War Doctrine
The war-decision law has as its basis a general
presumption against war. It acknowledges, however, that there are specific war-decision conditions
for waging just war. Through the studious application of these conditions, countries waging war
evaluate and clarify the reasons for the armed force
that they use. Before resorting to armed force there
is always a need to fully explore options short of
conflict.
General Presumption Against War
Modern just war doctrine remains based on St.
Thomas Aquinas’ formulation of the moral problem of war. 6,12,17,20–25 There is a presumption against
waging war because of the killing, destruction, and
misery that it brings. However, this presumption
may be overcome by meeting certain conditions set
forth in war-decision (jus ad bellum) and war-conduct (jus in bello) law.
It should be understood that although just war
doctrine comes in great measure from religious and
ethical sources, its relevance is not limited to those
of particular religious or ethical beliefs. Just war
doctrine can be followed as a matter of politicalmilitary prudence as well as religious or ethical
guidance. As the just war conditions are outlined it
should become clear that decision makers and their
constituents ought to be considering the issues
raised by them as a matter of common sense and
good policy.
War-Decision Conditions for Waging War
Law-abiding countries do not initiate war without first attempting to resolve issues without recourse to armed force. However, when circumstances are such that armed force becomes an option to be considered, a number of conditions are
evaluated to determine whether to proceed. These
conditions include: competent authority, just cause,
comparative justice, probability of success, no other
recourse, and right intentions.
Competent Authority. The first of the war-decision conditions of just war doctrine is the requirement that the belligerent have competent authority
to go to war. In the contemporary world this means
229
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
constitutional authority. To be sure, many states
today have little in the way of effective constitutional systems; incumbent regimes are frequently
based on raw power and are arbitrary. However, in
a country such as the United States the issue of constitutional competent authority to commit the nation to war is critical. A lesson from the Vietnam
War is that a president should have an absolutely
clear constitutional basis for waging war. This lesson had been learned by the time of the Persian Gulf
War. When US forces and their allies attacked Iraq
their commitment to combat was supported by the
vote of the Congress on 12 January 1991.
Just Cause. The second main condition for recourse to war is just cause. This condition may be
broken down into a number of requirements. First,
there is the substance of the just cause. The most
obvious just cause is self-defense. Much of modern
writing on just war rejects offensive wars, purportedly in behalf of justice, which had been justified
by the early just war writers. 20(pp21ff),26(piii) However,
the recent tragedies in Somalia, the Balkans, Rwanda,
Haiti, Kosovo, and elsewhere have forced reconsideration of the definition of just cause. There is an
increasing recognition that military intervention
against repressive, genocidal regimes may meet the
condition of just cause, even if the intervening power
has little or no claim of self-defense. Indeed, it can
be argued that there may be not only a moral right
but a moral duty to intervene in such situations—provided the other conditions of just war can be met.
Comparative Justice. The next requirement of
just cause is comparative justice. It is important to
recognize the character of the opposing regimes and
the practical consequences of victory or defeat if war
is waged. If belligerents, on one side, are democracies based on the rule of law and, on the other side,
totalitarian states based on repression, there is comparative justice on the side of the democracies because democratic regimes are more conducive to
liberty and the rule of law. If they win, people will
be liberated. If they lose, tyranny and possibly genocide will prevail. Of course, democracies based on
the rule of law remain in the minority in the international system. Thus, political-military realities
may make the evaluation of comparative justice
difficult. For instance, Kuwait was no ideal democracy in 1990, however, Iraq was ruled by an oppressive and aggressive regime, as it demonstrated in
repressing its own people and in its invasion and
brutal occupation of Kuwait. The ultimate issue
under comparative justice is whether the more just
party will prevail. 20(pp28ff),26(pp29ff)
Probability of Success. Another requirement of
just cause is that the means necessary to achieve it
be proportionate to the good achieved, in the light
of the probability of success. This necessitates a difficult calculation of the probable costs of victory for
the putatively just party—costs to both sides and
to the international community generally. It is
clearly possible to have an eminently just cause that
cannot be pursued because there is little or no probability of success, or because success is probable
only at prohibitive costs. 20(pp28ff),26(pp30ff)
The calculation of probability of success and proportionality must be made at the initiation of a war.
Because the course of wars can often differ from
initial expectations, this calculation must be adjusted at every point in the course of a war when
expectations of success with proportionate costs
change. If a belligerent with an apparently clear just
cause reaches the conclusion that continued prosecution of the war will not meet with success or that
the costs will be disproportionate or both, that belligerent should seek to terminate the war. 17(p280)
Much of the continuing debate about America’s role
in the Vietnam War turns on arguments about the
critical points when a reevaluation of the proportionate costs of the war in the light of the probabilities of success might have resulted in an earlier US
disengagement.
No Other Recourse. The next to the last requirement of just cause is that it be pursued with armed
force only after exhaustion of peaceful remedies.
This means reasonable exhaustion of peaceful
remedies. 20(pp31ff),26(p30) Peaceful remedies include diplomatic exchanges, mediation, arbitration, and adjudication in international tribunals, often with an
active role by international organizations such as
the United Nations or regional organizations such
as the Organization of American States or the Arab
League. Peaceful remedies can also include nonmilitary sanctions, such as those provided for use by
the Security Council in Article 41 of the UN Charter—“complete or partial interruption of economic
relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic,
radio, and other means of communication, and severance of diplomatic relations.”
It should be understood that there can be recourse to military means short of all-out war. In
Article 42, authorizing Security Council military
sanctions, reference is made to “demonstrations,
blockade and other operations by air, sea, or land
forces.” Thus, in the case of Iraq’s 1990 aggression
against Kuwait, the Security Council of the United
Nations authorized the coalition forces to carry out
230
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
a blockade of Iraq (SC Res. 665 of 26 August 1990).
No combat resulted from this maritime blockade
but it was obviously a use of armed force. The fullscale war only began on 18 January 1991 when Iraq
had failed to meet the requirement (SC Res. 678 of
28 November 1990) to withdraw from Kuwait and
obey the other relevant Security Council resolutions.
The determination that peaceful remedies have
been reasonably exhausted requires an estimate of
the probability that they will lead to realization of
the just cause and of the probable damage to the
just cause that may result from continued abstention from recourse to armed force. In the case of the
Persian Gulf crisis (1990–1991), there was little
doubt about the intention of Saddam Hussein’s
Iraqi regime to continue its illegal occupation of
Kuwait and to be a threat to the Gulf area. Moreover, as the months passed, it was clear that Kuwait was suffering from a reign of terror, the continuation of which was unacceptable.
Right Intention. The last of the major war-decision
requirements of just war is right intention. There are
three elements in this requirement. First, the just belligerent must limit its goals to those set forth in the
just cause. It should not expand them, in effect, taking advantage of success in a just war to accomplish
goals not included in the just cause. Second, the just
belligerent must make efforts to avoid a spirit of hatred and revenge in its pursuit of the war. This is a
hard saying for most belligerents, but it is a core
requirement of just war. Finally, reflecting the first
two elements, the just belligerent must wage the
war and negotiate the peace so as to promote, rather
than obstruct, the prospects for a just and lasting
peace. Even the most bitter enemies must coexist
after the war and measures that exceed the exigencies of military necessity and appear to be gratuitously cruel violate the requirements of right intention. Good examples of the practical rewards of
adherence to the principle of right intention may
be found in US postwar policies in occupied Germany and Japan. 20(pp33ff),26(p30)
CONTEMPORARY LEGAL AND MORAL RESTRAINTS ON WAR CONDUCT
Once the decision has been made that war cannot be avoided, and that the necessary conditions
have been met for waging war, there is a need for
legal and moral restraints on war conduct. These
restraints are guided by the principles of international war-conduct law. Several specific areas of international war-conduct law will be explored in this
chapter, as well as the place of war-conduct law in
just war doctrine.
The Principles of International War-Conduct Law
International war-conduct law is based on three
principles: military necessity, humanity, and chivalry.
Although this chapter focuses on contemporary
war, the principles of international war-conduct law
date to the early days of organized war.
Military Necessity
Military necessity requires that all war conduct
be proportionate to a legitimate military end, permitted by the laws of war and natural law, ordered
by a responsible commander, and subject to review.
The first element in this principle is true necessity.
This requirement is akin to the principle of proportion in the war-conduct law of just war doctrine.
Actions that exceed what is necessary to achieve a
legitimate military objective or that have no true
military utility (eg, gratuitous infliction of death
and destruction) are not permitted by the principle
of military necessity. Even if an action appears to
have true military utility it still is impermissible if
prohibited by the laws of war (eg, massive attacks
on civilian targets for the purpose of forcing surrender of the enemy’s forces.)20,27(¶1-5),28(p1801)
Thus far the definition of military necessity offered here is essentially that commonly accepted in
US military legal sources. Limitations of natural law
were added because the laws of war sometimes do
not cover all war conduct and recourse must be had
to perennial principles of natural law. For example,
genocidal conduct (the systematic extermination of
civilian populations solely because of their race,
religion, or ideology) was not clearly prohibited by
the laws of war during World War II. At the Nuremberg and other war crimes trials it was necessary to
invoke the concept of Crimes Against Humanity,
essentially a natural law rather than positive international law concept at that time, to deal with the
horrendous genocidal conduct of the Nazis. 20(pp66–67)
The decisions in war conduct must be made by
responsible commanders and they must be subject
to review, perhaps by a war crimes tribunal but
more likely by higher commanders and civilian
authorities. “Military necessity” is often, but erroneously, invoked as an unchallengeable, open-ended
license to take whatever actions seem necessary for
231
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
victory, as in the Kriegsraison doctrine developed by
German legalists and military commanders (c. 1870–
1945). The Kriegsraison doctrine held that “necessity
knows no law.” Given the temptation to interpret
military necessity in this way, it is important to emphasize the requirements of legitimate military necessity that, clearly, limit war conduct while justifying
that conduct that meets those requirements. 29
Humanity
The principle of humanity requires abstention
from means and methods that cause superfluous
suffering and includes the principle of discrimination, which prohibits direct, intentional attacks on
noncombatants and civilian targets. The rejection
of acts causing superfluous suffering reinforces the
requirement of the principle of military necessity
to limit war conduct to what is truly necessary in
terms of military utility. The principle of discrimination, which will be addressed further in this chapter in the discussion of just war doctrine, is perhaps
the most critical of the limits on war conduct because the risk of its violation is great at every level
of warfare from revolutionary/counterinsurgency
war to conventional interstate war to nuclear deterrence and war. 20(p65),27(¶1-6)
Chivalry
The principle of chivalry, derived from the knightly
codes of the past, requires that enemies be treated in
good faith, that belligerent communication be honest
and free of treachery, and that truces and other agreements be kept in good faith. 20(pp65–66),27(¶1-6)
Some Specific Areas of International WarConduct Law
Based on these three fundamental principles, the
international law of war deals primarily with the
following subjects: (a) belligerent status under the
law of war; (b) means and methods of destruction;
(c) prisoners of war; (d) wounded and sick; (e) belligerent occupation; and (f) sanctions for the laws
of war.
Determination of Belligerent Status
Belligerent status simply refers to the question
of who is a party to the conflict and thus entitled to
the rights and obligations of a belligerent. Belligerent status under the law of war is clear in the case
when the adversaries are sovereign states, such as
in the War of 1812 between the United States and
Great Britain. In the past, belligerent status was
acquired by revolutionary governments and their
forces through recognition by third powers (eg, the
Confederacy in the American Civil War, recognized
as a belligerent for purposes of the laws of war but
not yet as a new state by Great Britain and France).
Recognition of belligerency was usually based on
the perception that a revolutionary government
controlled substantial territory and its population,
that this government was organized and able to
engage in ordinary governmental functions, and
that its military forces had demonstrated that they
were reasonably capable of prevailing in the civil war.
Modern armed conflicts do not always present
the comparatively clear-cut state of affairs that existed in the American Civil War. Often civil wars or
wars of national liberation are waged by movements
and their forces located in remote areas, sometimes
based in foreign countries, often on the move. Control of whatever areas these movements occupy may
be based on the loyalty of the local inhabitants but
it may often be based on force, ceasing when the
revolutionaries move on. Still, such movements
may ultimately succeed, as the FLN (Front de
libération nationale) did in its Algerian war of national liberation, without occupying any important
part of the country for any substantial period.
The issue of belligerent status is complicated by
international politics. Some political-military movements, notably the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO), have been accorded political recognition and
treated by third parties to their war with Israel as
bona fide belligerents. This has been the case, notwithstanding the fact that the PLO was never able
to occupy and control any part of the area known
as Palestine. The PLO managed to develop a huge
body of supporting Third World (nonaligned) states
and Second World (Communist-block) states and
was treated with respect by First World (Western
industrialized) states other than the United States.
This support was evidenced by a grant of automatic
belligerent status accorded implicitly to the PLO in
the 1977 Geneva Protocol I Relating to the Victims of
International Armed Conflict. 30
Article 1(4) of the 1977 Geneva Protocol I gives
automatic belligerent status to national liberation
movements engaged in wars of national liberation
with “colonial” and “racist” regimes and “alien”
occupying powers. 31 This provision was aimed at
South Africa, Israel, and Portugal (then still a colonial power). The circumstances in which this provi232
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
sion was passed have changed, but it demonstrates
the willingness of the majority of the international
community to disregard objective requirements for
belligerent status in order to favor certain insurgent
movements. The fact that this provision appears in
Geneva Protocol I (a convention on international
conflicts), and not in Geneva Protocol II (which deals
with noninternational conflicts), reveals the preferential treatment given to these revolutionaries carrying
out wars of national liberation.
Article 1 of 1977 Geneva Protocol II, in contrast,
applies:
to all armed conflicts which are not covered by
Article 1 of … (Protocol I) and which take place in
the territory of a High Contracting Party [ie, a party
to this protocol] between its armed forces and dissident armed forces or other organized armed
groups which, under responsible command, exercise such control over a part of its territory as to
enable them to carry out sustained and concerted
operations and to implement this Protocol.
Further, Article 1(2) of 1977 Geneva Protocol II
specifies that:
this Protocol shall not apply to situations of internal disturbances and tensions, such as riots, isolated and sporadic acts of violence and other acts
of similar nature, as not being armed conflicts. 32
Neither Protocol I nor Protocol II has been ratified by a sufficient number of States to have entered
into force. Neither has been ratified by the United
States, which rejects a number of provisions of Protocol I, especially in Article 1(4), that give special
belligerent status on the basis of ideological rather
of objective political-military grounds. Article 1 of
Protocol II appears to provide the best guidance for
evaluation of claims to belligerent status under the
law of war. It should be emphasized that belligerent status engenders duties as well as rights under
the law. Many contemporary political/military
movements employ terrorism and other strategies,
tactics, and policies violative of the law of war, jeopardizing their claims to belligerent status.
Controlling the Means and Methods of Warfare
The law of war concerning means and methods
of warfare begins with attempts to ban or greatly
restrict certain weapons. On the whole, with the
exception of chemical warfare (CW) and biological
warfare (BW) means, these attempts have not been
very successful. As early as 1868 the St. Petersburg
Declaration33 claimed that the “progress of civilization should have the effect of alleviating as much
as possible the calamities of war,” that “the only
legitimate object which states should endeavor to
accomplish during war is to weaken the military
force of the enemy,” that “for this purpose, it is sufficient to disable the greatest number of men,” and that
“this object would be exceeded by the employment
of arms which uselessly aggravate the sufferings of
disabled men, or render their death inevitable.” This
provision reflected the influence of the principle of
humanity and the emphasis on avoidance of “superfluous suffering.”
Minimizing “Superfluous Suffering.” The prohibition of means causing “superfluous suffering”
was repeated in 1899 Hague Convention II and Article 23(e) of its successor, 1907 Hague Convention
IV, which states that it is especially forbidden “to
employ arms, projectiles, or materials calculated to
cause unnecessary suffering.”34(Art23e) However, although there has been broad acceptance of prohibitions against means causing “superfluous suffering” or “unnecessary suffering,” there has been little
agreement as to which specific means fall into the
forbidden category. In 1899 Hague Declaration IV
(3), “The High Contracting Parties agree to abstain
from the use of bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body, such as bullets with a hard
envelope which does not entirely cover the core, or
is pierced with incisions.”35 This declaration only
applied to wars between the contracting parties.
Great Britain and the United States were not parties to the 1899 Hague Declaration, which applied
principally to so-called “dumdum” bullets.
However, The Law of Land Warfare (published July
1956) states that “usage … has established the illegality of the use of lances with barbed heads, irregular-shaped bullets, and projectiles filled with
glass, the use of any substance on bullets that would
tend unnecessarily to inflame a wound inflicted by
them, and the scoring of the surface or the filing off
of the ends of the hard cases of bullets.”36(¶34b)
Objections were raised during the Vietnam War
to the small-caliber, high-velocity ammunition used
in the American-made US M-16 rifles. These projectiles tumble end over end on impact, creating a
large entry wound. Interestingly enough, the M-16’s
ammunition did not differ in this respect from that
of the AK-47 rifle37(pp267–268) (manufactured by the
former Soviet Union and supplied to the North Vietnamese military).
Critics of the American conduct of the Vietnam
233
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
War also condemned use of the cluster bomb [unit]
(CBU). CBUs had a container that, when dropped
from the air or fired by artillery, released numerous bomblets that fragment before, during, or after
impact, dispersing over wide areas. CBUs were effective in suppressing antiaircraft batteries in US
air raids in North Vietnam and later in the Israeli
siege of the PLO forces in Beirut in the 1982 Lebanon War. Critics charged that the CBUs hit civilian
as well as military targets and that the irregular
fragments caused wounds of the kind prohibited
by Article 23(3) of the 1907 Hague Convention. Inquiries by the International Committee of the Red
Cross proved inconclusive, it being difficult to distinguish the wounds caused by CBUs from those
caused by hand grenades or artillery shrapnel.
Therefore, use of cluster bombs against military targets is clearly permissible because these weapons
do not fall under the prohibition against cruel and
unnecessary suffering. Permissibility of use against
mixed military-civilian targets would depend on the
proportion of military to civilian targets and the
degree of military necessity for their use. Obviously,
use of CBUs against primarily civilian targets is prohibited by the principle of discrimination. 37(pp266–267)
Perhaps the most notorious charge of use of a
weapon causing superfluous suffering came concerning the American use of napalm during the
Vietnam War. Napalm became symbolic of the supposedly illegal conduct of the war by the American
forces. Following the war there were demands for
a convention outlawing napalm. The International
Committee of the Red Cross organized a conference
to draft a treaty on napalm and other forms of incendiary weapons. In the course of deliberations on
this subject, it was noted that napalm and other incendiary weapons, such as white phosphorous used
to mark targets, were standard in most modern
armies. Napalm was important in antitank warfare
and in attacks on fortified areas, especially caves,
bunkers and tunnel complexes.
Faced with these facts, the negotiating states finally agreed to a 1980 Weapons Convention that
does not ban napalm or other incendiary weapons
as such. Instead, it prohibits the use of such weapons directly against civilian targets or their use
when military utility is not clearly proportionate
to the risk to civilian targets. 38
There are provisions in the 1980 Weapons Convention regulating the use of land mines and other
antipersonnel devices (such as “booby traps”).
Again, there is no realistic possibility of prohibiting their use for reasonable military purposes.
Rather, the effort is to prohibit indiscriminate, irresponsible use of these means and to improve arrangements for protecting civilians in areas where
they have been deployed. 39
Prohibiting the Use of Chemical and Biological Agents. While consensus as to what weapons
cause superfluous or unnecessary suffering remains
elusive, major steps have been made to produce
both conventional and customary international law
prohibiting use of chemical weapons (CW) and biological weapons (BW). Gas warfare began in large
scale in World War I, although it had been used to
lesser extents in previous conflicts. 40 By the end of
the war on the Western Front, use of gas sprayed
from cylinders or fired in artillery shells was standard practice on both sides.
It could have been argued that CW was forbidden by Article 23a of 1907 Hague Convention IV,
which prohibited use of “poison or poisoned weapons.” However, the 1907 Hague Convention IV was
essentially a codification of past customary practice. It is thus questionable that the ban on poison
and poisoned weapons anticipated the kind of CW
employed in World War I. Rather, it would be logical to assume that this provision referred to the
kinds of use of poison and poisoned weapons employed in past wars, that is, poisoning food and
water, shooting poisoned arrows, or stabbing with
poisoned knives, lances, or bayonets. 20(p59)
In any event, CW was widely used on the Western Front. However, this experience seems to have
left a strong negative impression on military men.
Gas warfare never proved decisive in battle but it
caused huge casualties and made the miserable existence of the armies on both sides even more miserable. In short, gas warfare did not have a military
utility proportionate to the damage and inconvenience it caused. It appears that this view has prevailed in most armed forces, in the stress of battle
as well as in planning and training. Armed forces
have needed to prepare for use of CW by enemies
but they seldom have planned to initiate CW as a
preferred strategy.
Military skepticism about the utility of CW coincided with the urge to ban or limit modern weapons
after World War I. The 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol41
prohibits “the use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous
or other gases, and of analogous liquids, materials
or devices,” as well as “bacteriological methods of
warfare.” However, this prohibition was potentially
fragile. In effect, the 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol is a
“no first use” convention. Many states, in fact, ratified the Protocol with a reservation indicating that
234
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
they would not be the first to use CW, but reserved
the right to retaliate with CW. The party that breaks
the ban is subject to retaliation in kind with CW.
Indeed, it would seem that in a war between two
coalitions any member of a coalition in which one
of its members is attacked with CW is entitled to
retaliate in kind with CW against any member of
the coalition to which the party initiating CW belongs.
Despite the risk that the 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol
would become another “paper ban,” to be broken
readily under the stress of war, it survived because
it was prohibiting the use of means that belligerents
considered unreliable and likely to create more
problems than they would solve. Before World War
II gas was used by the Italians against the Ethiopians and the Japanese against the Chinese. But in
World War II gas was not used at all. There were
numerous occasions when CW might have proved
decisive, for instance against the Allied invasions
of Hitler’s Europe and against Japanese forces holding out in the Pacific Islands. But neither side used
CW. Abstention from use of CW continued in the
Korean War and in the numerous revolutionary/
counterinsurgency wars of the post–World-War-II era.
The United States had not ratified the 1925 Geneva
Gas Protocol but by the end of the Korean War it
was clear that the ban on gas was confirmed by
customary international law. Accordingly, the use
of so-called nonlethal CW by the US forces in Vietnam was controversial. The United States employed
herbicide agents to destroy vegetation near roads
subject to ambush. Herbicides were also used to
destroy crops in areas firmly controlled by enemy
forces. US forces used riot-control agents such as
tear gas to flush out enemies hiding in tunnels and
buildings in which civilians were also hiding. On
the merits, these CW means were appropriate and
proportionate to legitimate military objectives. Indeed, one of the ironies of the debates about use of
riot-control agents was that their use in domestic
disturbances in the United States and many parts
of the world was considered humane whereas
their use against enemy forces in Vietnam was
condemned. 37(pp248–266)
Nevertheless, recourse to these nonlethal means
was unfortunate in that it could be seen as opening
a “Pandora’s Box” that would erode the ban on CW.
The United States finally ratified the 1925 Geneva
Gas Protocol in 1975 with a reservation permitting
the retaliatory use of chemical weapons and agents.
The United States continued to claim that nonlethal CW, such as employed in Vietnam, was distinct
from the CW prohibited in the 1925 Geneva Gas
Convention. However, in a 1975 executive order by
President Ford the United States renounced first use
of herbicides in war except for use under regulations applicable to their domestic use in US bases
and defense perimeters. Crop destruction does not
appear to be contemplated in the order. The order
also renounced first use of riot control agents except in defensive modes to save lives. 27(¶6-4–¶6-5)
The ban on BW was strongly confirmed by the
1972 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their
Destruction, signed in Washington, London, and
Moscow. 42 Use of BW means is prohibited against
persons, animals, or plants, because of its indiscriminate and uncontrollable nature.
The 1993 Paris Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction was
ratified by the United States and many states
throughout the world. The convention goes beyond
prohibiting CW to arms control measures intended
to eliminate CW capabilities. The problem is that
implementation of the convention involves difficult
problems of inspection and verification. 43,44
A major achievement in the development of customary international law on CW occurred in the
1991 Persian Gulf War. Iraq had used CW against
the Iranians and on their own Kurdish dissidents.
Before Operation Desert Storm (the combat phase
of the war) there was great concern over the probable use of CW by the Iraqi forces against the USled coalition forces. The coalition forces went to
great lengths to protect their personnel against CW
attacks and to prepare for the treatment of CW casualties. However, there were apparently no plans
to retaliate in kind with CW means in the event of
Iraqi CW attacks. In any event, the Iraqis did not
use chemical weapons45 although the reasons for
their restraint are not known.
Deterring the Use of Nuclear Weapons. There
is no international legal prohibition against the use
of nuclear weapons per se. A number of resolutions
passed by the UN General Assembly and other international organizations and conferences condemn
nuclear weapons but they do not have the force of
conventional law. Instead, the threat of nuclear war
has been addressed through arms control agreements designed to prevent nuclear confrontations
by improving communications between potential
nuclear belligerents (eg, the 1963 “Hotline” Agreement, the 1971 “Hotline” Modernization Agreement,
the 1971 “Accidents Measures” Agreement, the 1973
235
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement, and the 1987
Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers Agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union).
Other Soviet-American arms control agreements
sought to maintain stability in the superpowers’
nuclear balance of deterrence forces (eg, SALT I
[Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty I], which included the ABM [Anti-Ballistic Missile] Treaty and
the Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms).
More recently US-Soviet Union/Russian Federation agreements have mandated elimination or reduction of specified types of nuclear missiles and
warheads (eg, the 1987 INF [Intermediate-range
Nuclear Forces] Treaty requiring the destruction by
both sides of all their intermediate-range missiles,
the first agreement to eliminate a whole class of
nuclear weapons). Moreover, the 1991 Strategic
Arms Reduction Treaty (START) I called for a 50%
reduction in Soviet ballistic missile warheads and
a 35% reduction in American warheads. Under
START I each side would have 6,000 total warheads
on Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs),
SLBMs (Sea-Launched Ballistic Missiles), and
bombers, with no more than 4,900 deployed on landbased or sea-launched ballistic missiles. The process of nuclear disarmament was continued in the
1993 US-Russian START II agreement. 46
Efforts to protect the earth from nuclear testing
and use in war are evidenced in the 1959 Antarctic
Treaty, the 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty, the 1967
Outer Space Treaty, the 1971 Seabed Arms Control
Treaty, the 1974 Threshold Test Ban Treaty, the 1975
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (PNE) Treaty (concerning nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes),
and the 1980 Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material. The Threshold Test Ban and
the PNE treaties are bilateral US-Soviet agreements.
The other treaties in this category are general conventions open to all states. 46
The consensus that it is imperative to stop the
spread of nuclear weapons to currentlyly nonnuclear
powers produced the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty
to which most states are parties. However, Israel,
India, and Pakistan, which all have nuclear weapons, are not parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
North Korea apparently has come close to developing nuclear weapons, although the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency
have been unable to verify the state of its nuclear
program. Iraq and Iran are both parties to the 1968
Non-Proliferation Treaty but there is evidence that
they are working to produce nuclear weapons.
It is clear that the states of the world are fully
cognizant of the dangers of nuclear war to themselves and to the whole world. At the same time,
many states claim the necessity of possessing
nuclear weapons to deter nuclear or conventional
aggression. There also appears to be a temptation
to acquire nuclear weapons to further national
power and prestige. Moreover, a number of states
striving to acquire nuclear weapons are driven by
deep ideological or religious motives that threaten
their neighbors with irresponsible recourse to
nuclear means (eg, North Korea, Iran, Iraq, India,
and Pakistan).
Although there is no conventional international
law (ie, treaty law) definitively dealing with the use
of nuclear weapons (except in the Antarctic and
outer space), it is possible to find an emerging rule
of customary international (unwritten) law in the
pattern of state practice since the American nuclear
bombing of two Japanese cities, Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, in 1945. Despite the development of
nuclear capabilities and long-range means of delivery since 1945, and despite the bitter conflicts that
have occurred in this period, there has been no further use of nuclear weapons in war. There is warrant for a claim that there is a rule of customary
international law prohibiting first use of nuclear
weapons. The Western nuclear powers have always
stressed the deterrent role of nuclear weapons,
which provide “assured destruction” and “unacceptable damage” through nuclear retaliation.
The United States, however, has never accepted
a public “no first use” position, particularly during
the Cold War, in order to maintain a nuclear deterrent against a massive Warsaw Pact conventional
attack. The Soviet Union, historically, declined even
more emphatically to agree to a “no first use” policy.
The end of the Cold War may alter these attitudes
but other considerations may incline nuclear powers to reject a “no first use” rule of international law.
International law depends on broad consensus
on a subject within the international community.
Consensus, however, is not simply a quantitative
matter. According to the subject, the qualitative element in consensus counts a great deal. This qualitative element is based on the power of individual
states and their relevance to the subject. For example, if 95% of the states agree on rules for outer
space but these states have little or no capability to
operate in space and the remaining 5% of the states
are active in outer space, the consensus of the 95%
will not produce effective rules of international law.
Clearly most of the states of the world do not as236
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
pire to become nuclear powers and they would support a total ban on nuclear weapons. But the United
States and Russia (and other successor states of the
former Soviet Union such as Ukraine), as well as
China, Britain, France, Israel, India, and Pakistan
have nuclear capabilities and serious reasons to
maintain them and deploy them in deterrent modes.
Indeed, such deterrents may be needed to maintain
the peace in many parts of the world, particularly
as the threat of proliferation of nuclear capabilities
to potential aggressor states grows. In these circumstances there appears to be little likelihood of a general prohibition of nuclear weapons in the international law of war. Interestingly enough, when the
International Court of Justice was asked to rule in
1966 on whether the threat or use of nuclear weapons violated international law, the court was unable to conclude that the use of nuclear weapons
was clearly prohibited.
Protection of Prisoners of War
In contrast, the international law of war protecting prisoners of war (POWs) is highly developed. 47,48 Building on the 1907 Hague Convention
IV and 1929 Geneva Convention, the 1949 Geneva
Convention on Prisoners of War provides a comprehensive, detailed POW regime. 49 The protections
of this legal regime are clearly intended for captured
service personnel of the armed forces of sovereign
states. The great number of armed conflicts involving revolutionary forces, however, have repeatedly
raised the question whether members of such forces
should be entitled to POW status and protection.
(The issue of belligerent status for revolutionary
governments and movements has already been discussed in the first part of this section.)
Viewed at the level of individual combatants,
international law, as set forth in the 1907 Hague
Convention IV, Article 1, and 1949 Geneva Convention (POWs), Article 4(2), requires that POW status
should be given if the individual belongs to an organization with a responsible commander, wears “a
fixed distinctive sign recognizable at a distance,
carries arms openly,” and is part of a unit that conducts its operations “in accordance with the laws
and customs of war.”
Most revolutionary units have a responsible commander, but the other requirements for POW status are often not met by such organizations. Their
personnel usually wear civilian clothing, do not
carry arms openly, and do not conduct their operations in accordance with the law of war. In the case
of the Vietcong and the PLO, for example, there
were grounds for denying belligerent status to captured members of these organizations. Nonetheless,
it must be conceded that they were not common
criminals. The American–South Vietnamese and Israeli resolution of the problem was to deny that the
Vietcong and PLO captives were entitled to POW
status but to accord them treatment roughly equivalent to that required for bona fide POWs. Most important, this involved allowing the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit and
monitor the treatment of the captives.
The first right of a POW is the right to survive
capture. Under Articles 23c and 23d of the 1907
Hague Convention IV it is especially forbidden “[t]o
kill or wound an enemy who, having laid down his
arms, or having no longer means of defence, has
surrendered at discretion” or “[t]o declare that no
quarter [shelter] will be given.” Once captured, the
POW should be removed from combat areas as
promptly as possible. The detaining power should
give notification of the names of detained POWs
through a Protecting Power, a neutral state designated by a belligerent to represent its interest.
The POW regime, codified in the 1907 Hague
Convention IV, Articles 4 through 20, and in the
comprehensive provisions of the 1949 Geneva Convention (POWs), requires that POWs have decent
living conditions and medical, religious, recreational, and postal services. There are detailed rules
concerning discipline in POW camps. Provision is
made for termination of captivity. These and other
aspects of the POW regime are subject to the supervision of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, which has greatly influenced treatment of
POWs, even in the most intractable of armed conflicts. It is well known, however, that POWs have
been sorely abused and mistreated in many recent
wars. The North Koreans and Chinese in the Korean War and the North Vietnamese in the Vietnam
War denied the ICRC access to POWs it detained.
Gross violations of the POW regime, beginning with
denial of quarter, followed by death marches, incarceration of POWs without adequate lodging,
food, or medical assistance, as well as intimidation
and torture, were rampant. 37,47(pp172ff,312ff)
Reprisals against POWs are prohibited by the
1949 Geneva POW Convention. Moreover, states
such as the United States do not retaliate in kind
when their captured service men and women are
abused. In any event, there is reason to believe that
retaliation against POWs from states such as North
Korea or North Vietnam would not elicit changes
237
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
in the illegal POW policies of those states. Despite
these failures of the POW regime, however, its successes are evidenced by the fact that millions of POWs
in modern wars have survived and returned home.
Protection of the Wounded and Sick
Provisions for the protection of the wounded and
sick go back to the 1864 Red Cross Convention. Protection of the wounded and sick on land was also
provided in the 1929 Geneva revision of the 1864
Convention and in the current 1949 Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field
(GWS). 50 Protection for the wounded and sick at sea
was provided in the 1907 Hague Convention X and
is presently provided by the 1949 Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the
Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of
Armed Forces at Sea (GWS-SEA). 51
Article 12 of the 1949 GWS Convention prescribes
the treatment to be given the wounded and sick. It
prohibits any discrimination on the basis of nationality, sex, religion, or political opinion. Torture or
subjection to biological experiments is prohibited.
Proper treatment of women is demanded.
The 1949 GWS gives detailed provisions for collecting and caring for the wounded and sick, including religious services, and for proper disposal of
the dead. There are extensive provisions for protection of medical units and personnel and for medical aircraft. The Convention prescribes the use of
the distinctive Red Cross (or Red Crescent or Red
Lion and Sun) emblem.
The 1949 GWS-SEA Convention repeats the basic protections of GWS and adds provisions on protection of shipwrecked members of the armed
forces. The term “shipwrecked” includes forced
landings at sea by, or from, aircraft. The conditions
under which hospital ships are immune from attack are delineated, including the proper placement
of the distinctive emblem, as well as the conditions
for immunity of medical and religious personnel.
Expectations Regarding Belligerent Occupation
Conventional law regulating belligerent occupation is found in some parts of the 1907 Hague Convention IV and in the 1949 Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War. 52,53 It is important to understand the premises
of this body of international law. The law of belligerent occupation assumes situations in which part
of the sovereign territory of one belligerent has been
occupied by the armed forces of another sovereign
state with which it is at war. This occupation is
termed “precarious” because it depends on the fortunes of war. However, the law of belligerent occupation should come into effect when a belligerent
has established firm control of the enemy’s territory and appears to be capable of retaining control
for a substantial period. 28(pp1876ff),54,55
The theory in legal doctrine is that the original
sovereign having been temporarily replaced, the
occupying power should take over the basic functions of government in the areas it controls. The
occupying power is allowed to take all reasonable
measures to ensure security of its forces as it continues the conflict beyond the occupied area. At the
same time, the occupying power is expected to
maintain law and order, assure at least the minimal
governmental functions necessary to the population, and to render relief services if needed and
within its capabilities. The occupied population,
however much they may resent their forces’ defeat
and the occupation, are expected to cooperate with
the occupying power in order to maintain some
minimal standard of living during the occupation.
Two principles are particularly important in the
law of belligerent occupation. The first is implied
in the concept of “precarious occupation.” Because
the occupation is temporary, no fundamental
changes should be made in the civil order and the
economy of the occupied territory. While laws, institutions, and practices that are violative of human
rights can be overturned, as in the occupation of
the territory of a tyrannical, oppressive regime, such
as Nazi Germany, the ordinary laws, institutions,
and practices found in most societies should be continued. The occupying power usually rules by military government while continuing in office those
middle- and lower-level governmental personnel
who continue their necessary functions under the
direction of the military government.
Although the occupied population is expected to
cooperate with the occupying power and not engage in subversive activities, they are not to be
forced to take part in the war against their own side.
Private property should be protected from pillage
by the occupying forces, both in combat zones and
in occupied areas. Articles 47 through 54 of the 1949
Geneva Convention regarding treatment of civilians53 prohibits a number of practices branded as
war crimes in World War II, such as mass deportations to other countries or areas, and forced labor.
Two kinds of situations challenge the premises
238
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
of the law of belligerent occupation. The first is one
in which serious resistance movements develop
within occupied territories, by spontaneous actions
of some of the inhabitants or regular forces left behind to continue the war or, often, some combination of both as was the case in Russia in World War
II. As the activities of the resistance forces develop,
the occupying power attempts to deter and defeat
them by counterforce operations. This is a legitimate use of force. Very often, however, purely
counterforce operations do not suffice and the occupying power turns to various reprisals against
the civilian population on the theory that the resistance forces could only operate with the support,
or the acquiescence, of the population. A typical
(though illegal) tactic is to punish a town or locality where resistance forces have struck. Such reprisals, including the taking and killing of hostages,
wholesale destruction of population centers, indiscriminate roundups of suspects who are denied due
process, mistreated, and tortured, are prohibited by
Articles 31 through 34 of the 1949 Geneva Civilians
Convention. 53
The dilemma for civilians in occupied areas is
that they cannot expect some of their number to
continue the war by irregular warfare behind the
front and still benefit from protection and services
of the occupying power. To be sure, resistance in wars
such as World War II is often engendered in the first
place by failure of the occupying power to honor
its duties under the law of belligerent occupation.
On the other hand, even a law-abiding occupying
power will be disinclined to continue to perform
its legal duties to a population that supports directly
or indirectly resistance operations endangering its
security.
The other situation confounding the law of belligerent occupation is that of civil war. As with
much of the law of war, difficulties arise from the
fact that belligerents in modern wars often are not
sovereign states but dissident movements within
sovereign states. These revolutionaries usually
claim to be the rightful sovereign, engaged in overthrowing an unjust regime. If they occupy some
territory more or less permanently they do not consider it to fit the concept of occupied territory on
which the law of belligerent occupation is based.
On the other hand, it is often the case that revolutionary forces, particularly in the early stages of a
civil war, cannot hold much territory for long. Or
they may only be able to hold remote, inaccessible
areas where there is little need for normal governmental services.
When, however, revolutionary forces do hold
populated areas for prolonged periods, their relations with the indigenous population can vary
greatly. Sometimes the local population may support the revolutionaries. However, the local population may favor the incumbent regime or simply
be neutral. In these cases, revolutionary forces are
inclined to impose very harsh policies, intimidating and exploiting the local population. Clearly
such conduct is violative of the international law
of belligerent occupation. As is the case with the
other parts of international war-conduct law, civil
wars usually challenge the authority of laws that
were developed primarily for the armed forces of
sovereign states in international wars.
The foregoing survey of modern international
war-conduct law has set forth the principal legal
prescriptions that a law-abiding belligerent power
should follow. It has also recognized that some
belligerents, particularly totalitarian regimes and
adversaries in revolutionary/counterinsurgency
wars, frequently violate international war-conduct
law. This raises a fundamental question: What sanctions exist to enforce the international law of war?
Sanctions for Violations of the International Law
of War
The US Army’s Field Manual 27-10, The Law of
Land Warfare states that there are two remedies for
violations of the international law of war: reprisals
and war crimes proceedings. Reprisals are defined
as “acts of retaliation in the form of conduct which
would otherwise be unlawful, resorted to by one
belligerent against enemy personnel or property for
acts of warfare committed by the other belligerent
in violation of the law of war, for the purpose of
enforcing future compliance with the recognized
rules of civilized warfare.”36(¶497a) The Law of Land
Warfare gives as an example “the employment by a
belligerent of a weapon the use of which is normally
precluded by the law of war would constitute a lawful reprisal for intentional mistreatment of prisoners of war held by the enemy.”36(¶497a)
There are a number of problems with recourse
to reprisals to force an enemy to cease violating the
law of war. The first is that all four of the 1949
Geneva Conventions prohibit reprisals against
POWs and civilians, forbidding retaliation in kind
for some of the most common violations of the law
of war. The second is that recourse to a weapon
“normally precluded” comes down to use of chemical warfare (CW) or biological warfare (BW), which,
as discussed above, are the only weapons clearly
prohibited by the law of war. As previously dis239
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
cussed, both law and good policy would condemn
recourse to CW or BW as reprisals. This leads to
the third problem with reprisals, namely, their use
tends to create a retaliatory spiral of illegal measures by adversaries that can destroy major parts
of the law. A major example is the experience in
World War I where the opposing navies competed
in violating traditional principles of the law of maritime warfare to the point where there was no such
law in effect by the end of the war.
Another example of problems with reprisals involves chemical warfare in World War I. The Germans employed gas first. The Allies’ reaction was
not a series of discrete retaliatory acts, that is, retaliating in kind with their own chemical means.
Rather, the Allies’ developed and used gas warfare
as a standard tactic throughout the rest of the war.
They then unwisely condemned the German use of
chemical warfare in a provision of the Versailles
Treaty. Practically speaking, despite Allied claims,
use of chemical warfare was not “rightly condemned”
at the end of the war; it was standard practice for
all forces that had chemical warfare capabilities.
The other sanction for the law of war suggested
by The Law of Land Warfare is war crimes proceedings. 36(¶497,¶505–¶509) Ideally, persons charged with violations of the law of war should be brought to trial
before a fair tribunal whose judges are knowledgeable in military science and the international law
of war. Unfortunately, there have been difficulties
establishing such tribunals.
The principal problem with war crimes proceedings is the inability to take control of the alleged
war criminals so that they can be brought to justice. Generally, this can only be solved in cases where
there is a complete victory over forces in whose
ranks are alleged war criminals, as in the case of Germany and Japan after World War II. Critics of the
Nuremberg and Tokyo trials complained of “victors’
justice” and there are genuine issues concerning the
fairness of those and other war crimes trials. Without a “victor,” however, there is little or no likelihood of bringing alleged war criminals to justice.
This problem became clear in the Korean War.
Gross violations of the law of war, particularly with
respect to POWs and civilians, were widely known.
The United Nations command set lawyers to work
preparing for war crimes trials. Unfortunately, there
was a stalemate instead of a victory and there were
no UN war crimes trials. Likewise, there was no US
victory in Vietnam and thus no trials of the North
Vietnamese who had tortured and mistreated US
POWs. There was a military victory in the Persian
Gulf War, but not total victory as in the case of Germany and Japan. The civilian and military personnel guilty of the rape of Kuwait, of massive crimes
against the environment (such as setting the oil
fields on fire), of indiscriminate attacks on Israeli
and Saudi population centers with Scud missiles,
and other crimes were not punished.
A second problem with war crimes proceedings
as a sanction for the law of war is that they can be
outrageously abused. In the Korean and Vietnam
wars the communist powers claimed that all captured POWs were war criminals per se, undeserving of POW protections. Had communist POWs
been tried by the allies, this would have simply
encouraged ludicrous trials of the POWs held by
the communists, as a retaliation. 37(pp312ff),47(pp316)
Over the past several years, there have been two
significant developments relating to the enforcement of international laws relating to armed conflict. First, the United Nations has established two
special war crimes tribunals—The International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTFY) and The International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). Both of these tribunals are empowered to indict and try individuals for a variety of
crimes related to the conflicts in those areas. Second, under the auspices of the United Nations, a
statute for an International Criminal Court has been
drafted. Although this court has yet to be formally
established, it will provide the type of standing
body that could try individuals for violations of the
jus in bello.
It must, of course, be recognized that there are
evil and irresponsible regimes in the world and that
they will usually not feel obligated to obey the law
of war by the threat of reprisals or war crimes proceedings. What then should a law-abiding state,
faced with such an enemy, do? The law-abiding
state should hold to its own values and obey the
law itself because it is the right thing to do. This is
not an unrealistic injunction. Wars are not usually
won by illegal behavior. Massive air attacks on
population centers in World War II did not prove
decisive. Such indiscriminate attacks certainly contributed to the defeat of Nazi Germany but they did
not force the German and Japanese people to demand surrender. If anything, they encouraged a
spirit of resistance—as was also the case in Britain
pounded by the blitzkrieg. Post–World-War-II critiques of strategic bombing suggested that many of
the military assets that it required could have been
put to better use in counterforce attacks on strictly
military targets.
To be sure, this argument can be countered with
the success of the atomic bomb at Hiroshima and
240
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Nagasaki in ending the war. This case is unique. It
happened when the United States was the only
country with atomic weapons. Today there are
many nuclear powers. First use of nuclear weapons would risk initiating a nuclear war unacceptable to any sane decision maker. As previously observed, no nuclear power has employed nuclear
weapons in war since 1945.
The argument, then, for restraint is twofold: respect for the law and recognition that its violation
is not a shortcut to military success and may engender problems that will haunt the wrongdoer in
the future. There remains the question of how a lawful belligerent can promote observance of the law
in its own armed forces.
The War-Conduct Law in Just War Doctrine
War-conduct law is based on principles in waging war. These include the principle of proportion
and the principle of discrimination. The principle
of double effect is utilized in interpreting the principle of discrimination. The discussion will conclude
with a special case: nuclear deterrence and war.
War-Conduct Principles in Waging War
The war-conduct law of just war doctrine, in contrast to the detailed prescriptions of international
law, consists of two basic principles, proportion and
discrimination. These principles, of course, parallel those discussed above, as central parts of the legal principles of military necessity and humanity.
Just war doctrine endorses generally the detailed
prescriptions of the international law of war. There
are, however, differences in the way that proportion and discrimination are interpreted in the international law of war and just war doctrine, as the
discussion in this section will demonstrate.
The Principle of Proportion. The war-conduct
law of just war doctrine begins with the same concept of proportion as that found in the international
law of war. Military actions must be proportionate
to the legitimate military ends to which they are
directed. It will be recalled, however, that there is
also a principle of proportion in the war-decision
law of just war doctrine. The war-decision law of
just war doctrine requires that the overall means used
to achieve the just cause must be proportionate to
the good achieved, in the light of the probability of
success. Just war doctrine does not mandate the
pursuit of a just cause by any and all means, only
by proportionate means. This affects the interpretation of the war-conduct principle of proportion
in just war doctrine.
It is possible that a pattern of conduct in which
most discrete actions are proportionate to legitimate
military ends might still be deemed disproportionate in the war-decision calculus of proportionality
of means to the just end. War-conduct law evaluates proportionality at the tactical and strategic levels of military necessity (in French, raison de guerre).
War-decision law evaluates proportionality at the
level of grand strategy (in French, raison d’êtat).
Because the ultimate aim of the just war is to achieve
overall proportionality in the use of means to
achieve the just cause, considerations of war-decision proportionality must guide war-conduct
proportionality. 20(pp27–31,38–42)
An example is provided by the American experience in Vietnam. The American military objectives,
namely, to defend South Vietnam against indirect
and direct aggression, and to build a viable democratic polity, secure from communist tyranny, were
eminently just. In pursuit of these objectives, US
forces engaged in a long war in which tens of thousands of decisions were made about war-conduct
proportionality at the strategic and tactical levels.
Some of these decisions resulted in measures disproportionate to the military objectives and some
may not even have had a legitimate military objective. But the overwhelming majority of the decisions
resulted in actions proportionate to the military
objectives as judged by the responsible commanders. It may well have been the case, however, that
the cumulative effects of the American strategies
and tactics produced a pattern of actions that might
be judged disproportionate to the overall just cause.
This would be particularly true when viewed in the
light of the probability of success, which declined
as the long war continued. Viewed in retrospect, it
might have been better had the United States not
waged the long, ultimately losing, war even though
the cause was just.
The practical implication of the relation of wardecision law to war-conduct law in just war doctrine is that the highest military commanders and
civilian officials must control military strategy and
tactics with guidance based on their overall evaluation of the proportionality of means to the just
cause. This evaluation must be continuous, starting with the decision to go to war and continuing
through the course of the war, strongly influenced
by changing estimates of the probability of success.
A war may start with the promise that a contemplated grand strategy and its strategic and tactical
241
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
components will produce results reasonably proportionate to the just cause. As the war progresses
this judgment may turn out to be unrealistic. At this
point the highest civilian and military leaders have
to decide whether to change strategies and tactics
or, in the worst case, terminate the war. 20(pp27–28,94–96)
The concept of proportion in war conduct has not
received the attention it deserves in recent just war
scholarship. Most attention has been fixed on the
principle of discrimination.
The Principle of Discrimination. The principle of
discrimination or noncombatant immunity is considered by just war theorists to be the main source
of restraint on belligerents purporting to wage a just
war. Discrimination is treated as a moral principle,
not simply as a principle derived from long belligerent practice. This is ironic because, in fact, the
principle of discrimination was strongly influenced
by belligerent practice, greatly influenced by the
standards of chivalry, and incorporated into just war
doctrine by the Scholastics well after St. Augustine
and St. Thomas Aquinas. 12(pp26,43ff,196ff) Nevertheless,
the principle of discrimination is held out by church
authorities, such as the American Catholic Bishops
in their 1983 pastoral,26(pp33–34) and the leading modern just war writers, such as Ramsey21(pp143–147,428–432)
and Walzer,24(pp138–159) as an immutable moral principle.
The issue much debated in just war scholarship
and the pronouncements of religious bodies and
authorities is the meaning of the principle of discrimination and its implications for contemporary
strategies of deterrence and war. The very definition
of the principle of discrimination invites competing interpretations. The principle prohibits direct,
intentional attacks on noncombatants and civilian
targets. It is necessary, then, to define in each case
what is a “direct” attack, what is “intentional,” who
is a “noncombatant,” and what is a “civilian target.”
Making these determinations has always been
difficult but the diverse forms of modern deterrence
and war increase the difficulties. Nuclear weapons
that threaten noncombatants and civilian targets in
huge areas of the globe are at the upper range of
deterrence and war. Weapons that cannot be employed in populated areas without causing great
damage to noncombatants and civilian targets are
at the level of conventional war. Finally, at the level
of revolutionary/counterinsurgency war is the
prospect of warfare carried out literally within the
civilian society, the civilians being the “sea” in
which Mao’s revolutionary fish swim, pursued by
the counterinsurgents.
To complicate the problem further, modern concepts of “total war,” whether conventional or at the
revolutionary/counterinsurgency level, will often
deny that noncombatants or civilian targets should
be immune from attacks because they are essential
components of the enemy’s total war effort. This is
not a new development. Sherman and Sheridan
waged total war against Confederate noncombatants and deliberately destroyed nonmilitary targets. The Allies conducted a successful hunger
blockade against Germany in World War I. The
“United Nations” (as the Western Allies referred to
themselves during World War II) carried out “city
busting” strategic air raids against the Germans and
Japanese with the declared intention of breaking the
will of the civilian population. In modern civil wars,
often waged between different ideological, religious,
racial, or ethnic groups, mere membership in the
enemy class warrants direct intentional attack.
Confronted with the dilemmas of reconciling the
principle of discrimination with the massive destruction of modern warfare, some turn to various
forms of pacifism. Some, notably nuclear pacifists,
deny the possibility of a just nuclear war or even a
just nuclear deterrent posture. Others, reacting to
the development of ever more destructive conventional war capabilities, are abandoning just war
doctrine, asserting that if just wars were ever possible in the past they are no longer possible. Still
others deny the possibility of any just war. All of
these positions could be based on interpretations
of the principle of proportion but the usual emphasis is on the principle of discrimination. These various forms of pacifism are influential but they remain a minority view.
Most morally concerned people concede the necessity of some form of deterrence and defense in a
world manifestly threatened by aggression and
human rights violations in many parts of the world.
They then struggle to find ways to reconcile the requirements for efficacious deterrence and defense
with the principles and proscriptions of international law and some kind of just war doctrine. This
brings them to confront the problem of interpreting the principle of discrimination. Most would insist that the principle must be interpreted to protect noncombatants and civilian targets from direct
intentional attack. They would reject the “total war”
concept that noncombatants and civilian targets,
indeed whole societies, should be subjected to direct intentional attack. This leaves the issue of defining “direct,” “intentional” attacks.
The Principle of Double Effect. Given the dilemmas of maintaining the principle of discrimination
242
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
while accepting the destruction caused by modern
weapons and methods in areas containing noncombatants and civilian targets, recourse is generally
had to the principle of double effect. The principle
is explained by a leading moralist, McCormick, and
by the political philosopher Walzer (whose book,
Just and Unjust Wars, is the most influential work
on just war doctrine).
McCormick states:
It is a fundamental moral principle [unanimously
accepted by Catholic moralists] that it is immoral
directly to take innocent human life except with
divine authorization. “Direct” taking of human life
implies that one performs a lethal action with the
intention that death should result for himself or another. Death therefore is deliberately willed as the
effect of one’s action. “Indirect” killing refers to an
action or omission that is designed and intended
solely to achieve some other purpose(s) even though
death is foreseen as a concomitant effect. Death therefore is not positively willed, but reluctantly permitted as an unavoidable by-product. 56(p805)
Walzer’s version of the principle of double effect is:
The intention of the actor is good, that is, he aims
narrowly at the acceptable effect; the evil effect is
not one of his ends, nor is it a means to his ends,
and, aware of the evil involved, he seeks to minimize it, accepting costs to himself. 24(p155)
Acceptance of the principle of double effect is the
majority position among moralists and ethicists discussing just war doctrine. However, whatever the
validity of the principle may be when applied to
other subjects, we find it unacceptable as part of
just war doctrine. The heart of our disagreement
lies in that part of Walzer’s definition when he requires that the action “is not a means to his ends.”
Moreover, we reject McCormick’s treatment of intention and the distinction between “direct” and
“indirect” killing.
We contend that the actor making a decision to
attack a military target that is collocated with noncombatants and civilian targets “intends” all the
probable consequences of his attack. Anticipating
that his attack will, unavoidably, cause both military and civilian damage, the civilian damage is “a
means to his [military] ends.” For example, suppose
at the level of revolutionary/counterinsurgency
war, the insurgents have taken over a village, fortified it, and intermingled with its inhabitants. The
insurgents fire on a counterinsurgent patrol. The
patrol calls in reinforcements to attack the village
after preliminary artillery barrages and air strikes.
There is no way that the counterinsurgents can successfully defeat the insurgents without inflicting
severe casualties on the noncombatants and great
destruction to the village. The legitimate military
end requires the use of means that inevitably will
cause civilian damage. To say that in these attacks
counterinsurgents do not “intend” to cause such
damage and that it is not a “means to their [military] end” is a proposition that does not provide a
morally acceptable excuse for having inflicted damage and injuries on noncombatants.
At the level of conventional war, in the Persian Gulf
War the coalition forces launched sophisticated air and
cruise missile attacks on legitimate military targets in
Baghdad. It has long since been demonstrated that
no amount of sophisticated military hardware and
delivery systems can ensure that attacks in a heavily
populated area will not cause noncombatant casualties and serious damage to civilian targets. To say that
this damage is not intended when these weapons are
launched is to deny reality.
Our approach begins with the proposition that
the principle of discrimination is not absolute. The
principle was not absolute in its historic origins,
which were to be found as much, if not more, in
customary practice as in moral doctrine. The principle was not, until very recently, clearly articulated
and applied in the pronouncements of the Catholic
Church and other churches. Moreover, if the principle is really absolute and the only way around it
is recourse to the principle of double effect, preservation of the principle comes at the price of a dubious escape clause couched in terms that could strike
ordinary people, such as military commanders, as
double talk.
The principle of discrimination can retain its role
as a major limit on war conduct by combining it
with the principle of proportion. The principle of
discrimination should always start with the prohibition of direct intentional attacks on noncombatants and civilian targets. However, it should be
recognized that direct intentional attacks on legitimate military targets may unavoidably cause what
strategists call collateral damage (McCormick’s concomitant damage). Here is where proportionality
comes in. Collateral damage to noncombatants and
civilian targets must be proportionate to the legitimate military necessities of the action.
Indeed, Walzer’s original formulation of the principle of double effect, implicit in the refined definition quoted above, requires that, “The good effect
243
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
is sufficiently good to compensate for allowing the
evil effect; it must be justified under Sidgwick proportionality rule.”24(p153) Sidgwick’s proportionality
rule requires that individuals “weigh ‘the mischief
done,’ which presumably means not only the immediate harm to individuals but also any injury to
the permanent interests of mankind, against the
contribution that mischief makes to the end of
victory.”24(p129)
To return to the two examples discussed above, if
the enemy fire from the fortified village is relatively
light and the fact that the village is in insurgent
hands does not present a major military problem,
the counterinsurgents’ reaction against this mixed
military-civilian target should be restrained. In such
a case, massive ground, artillery, and air attacks
would violate the principle of discrimination as well
as the principle of proportion. Even a limited reaction by the counterinsurgents will endanger noncombatants and civilian targets but the resulting
collateral damage will be proportionate to the military necessity of dealing with the fortified village.
In the case of the air and missile attacks on
Baghdad, awareness of the likelihood of some collateral damage should compel the attacking force to attempt to limit such damage to what is proportionate
to the military necessities of taking out the targets.
The principle of discrimination should also oblige the
attacking force’s leaders to define very clearly the
importance of the military targets to be destroyed
and estimate the probable amount of collateral damage. If it is concluded that the risks of collateral
damage are very high and the importance of the military targets is not so high, these targets in a mixed
military/civilian location should not be attacked.
It may well be that our approach and that of
Walzer and others who require the principle of
double effect to reconcile war-conduct with the
principle of discrimination may, in practice, come
to similar results. Both approaches counsel restraint
in attacking mixed military/civilian targets, sometimes even to the extent of abstention from attacks
justified by military necessity. When, however, the
exigencies of military necessity are very critical,
high collateral damage may be the price of pursuing a just war.
The grave problems of reconciling the principle
of discrimination with the military necessities of
modern warfare have been exacerbated by the practice of some belligerents of deliberately hiding their
combatants behind noncombatants and civilian targets. Guerrilla forces, such as the Vietcong during
the Vietnam War, routinely intermingle with noncombatants and fight from civilian areas so that it
becomes impossible to do battle with them without causing collateral damage. For example, the
North Vietnamese parked antiaircraft batteries, artillery, and military vehicles on city streets in residential neighborhoods, as did the PLO in the 1982
Lebanon War and the Iraqis in the Persian Gulf War.
In 1982, the PLO placed antiaircraft batteries on the
roofs of hospitals in Lebanon, and fought a siege
battle in Beirut that resulted in great civilian damage and loss of life.
Such behavior is morally reprehensible. It does
not relieve an attacking force from observing the
principle of discrimination and the duty to limit
collateral damage proportionately to the requirements of military necessity but it leaves the belligerent that fights from civilian locations with the major
responsibility for inevitable collateral damage.
The just war principles of proportion and discrimination have been discussed with reference to
conventional international and revolutionary/
counterinsurgency wars. There remains the most
difficult subject in just war doctrine: nuclear deterrence and war.
A Special Case: Nuclear Deterrence and War
The concept of nuclear deterrence combines wardecision and war-conduct principles in a unique
way. The potential for massive casualties, destruction, and environmental contamination in nuclear
war has caused most responsible people to conclude
that no such war should ever be fought. Yet nuclear
forces have been developed by some nations and
other nations are trying to develop their own
nuclear capabilities. There are two related reasons
for this fact.
The first reason to develop and maintain nuclear
weapons is to deter potential enemies possessed of
nuclear weapons from using them for intimidation
or actual use in aggressive war. The second reason
for having nuclear war capabilities is the belief that
there is a threat from a potential enemy not only of
total defeat in war but of total subjugation in the
event of the enemy’s victory. In the approximately
four decades of the Cold War era, the United States
and its allies believed that it was absolutely necessary to possess nuclear capabilities to deter and
defend against Soviet/Warsaw Pact aggression,
both nuclear and conventional. The United States
and its allies also believed that capitulation,
whether through intimidation by a Soviet superiority in nuclear capabilities or as the result of ac244
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
tual defeat by Soviet forces, would put Western
Europe and even the United States in a situation in
which the tyranny of the Soviet totalitarian regime
would be extended to all or most of the free world.
Note that, in the first instance, the Western nuclear
deterrent/defense posture was designed to deal
with the Soviet nuclear threat, but that concern for
the consequences of defeat by the Soviets was so
great that nuclear deterrence/defense was extended
to the threat of Soviet conventional aggression.
This rationale for nuclear deterrence/defense
may be mostly overtaken by the events since the
breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991 and with it the
end of the Cold War. Nevertheless, it remains relevant to many possible situations in which local
potential aggressors, if possessed of nuclear weapons, might pose the dual threat of nuclear intimidation or destruction, and imposition of tyrannical
regimes on the victims of their aggression. Such
dual threats could well be posed by states such as
Iran, Iraq, or North Korea.
In judging the moral permissibility of nuclear
deterrence/defense it then becomes necessary to
look in each case at the degree of threat a particular
state faces, both in terms of nuclear or other aggression and of the consequences of capitulation or defeat in war. In war-decision terms, just war doctrine
would look to the overall proportionality of nuclear
deterrence/defense to the threat, particularly of
nuclear intimidation or aggression, but also of conventional aggression, backed up by nuclear threats,
balanced with the probable consequences of defeat
for continued existence of the defeated society. In
war-conduct terms, just war doctrine would evaluate the proportionality of nuclear or conventional
responses to the threat or use of nuclear weapons
by an aggressor.
Deterrence is not a new subject. The existence and
deployment of armed forces have always had a deterrence purpose. However, deterrence has become
a particularly critical concept in the nuclear age. The
great desire of nuclear powers is that their nuclear
postures prevent nuclear war by discouraging any
idea of launching nuclear war. The formula developed in the nuclear age is that a deterrent posture
must be based on clear nuclear capabilities sufficient to survive an aggressor’s nuclear first strike
and on a credible will to impose unacceptable damage on the aggressor in retaliation. 57–59
This concept of deterrence changes the concept
of proportionality. Nuclear deterrent proportionality is, in effect, based on disproportionality. The
potential nuclear aggressor must not simply perceive that the potential victim can defend itself with
proportionate means. The aggressor must perceive
that the potential victim will respond with means
so disproportionate to the threat and so unacceptable to any rational actor that nuclear aggression is
unthinkable. There is a deep irony in this concept.
The kind of nuclear deterrent threat that is likely to
be most effective is almost certainly based on the
intention to do something that is grossly disproportionate and clearly immoral. Yet the fruit of this disproportionate deterrent threat may very well be the
avoidance of nuclear war. It is fair to say that modern just war doctrine has not resolved the dilemma
of reconciling credible threats to conduct disproportionate nuclear war with the commendable goal of
deterring the initiation of nuclear war. 60
Attempts have been made, however, to broaden
the options available to a power seeking to deter
nuclear aggression. The extreme posture of deterrence is mutual assured destruction (MAD). In
MAD, the deterrent threat is to launch unlimited
war in retaliation for any nuclear first-strike by an
aggressor. This threat clearly implies massive destruction of population centers. But the threat is
posed in the belief that its very extremity will deter
nuclear war altogether. This posture is sometimes
known as a deterrence only strategy. Its purpose is
to deter, and a failure of deterrence is considered a
catastrophe beyond repair, so comparatively little
effort is made to develop limited nuclear war-fighting strategies. Indeed, it is often argued by deterrence-only strategists that the very suggestion that
there might be limited nuclear wars undercuts the
credibility of MAD deterrence postures. 57(pp5,44,71–79)
From time to time the United States, notably in
the Nixon, Carter, and Reagan administrations, has
explored the possibility of deterrence-plus nuclear
postures. Such postures confront the possibility of
deterrence failing and seek alternatives to the full
nuclear second strike response to nuclear aggression threatened in MAD. The essence of deterrence-plus nuclear postures is an emphasis on
counterforce rather than countervalue targeting.
Countervalue strategies contemplate direct attacks
on enemy population centers, it being thought that
a potential aggressor would not risk retaliatory
strikes against its civilian population, presumably
that which it most values.
Counterforce strategies attempt to limit nuclear
targets to military targets for several reasons. First,
such limitation may possibly be reciprocated, avoiding a succession of horrendous city-swapping exchanges. Second, counterforce attacks may so cripple
the enemy’s nuclear capabilities as to limit his ability
to wage nuclear war. Third, it may be that a ruthless
245
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
regime may “value” its military and military-industrial assets more than its own population. Fourth, some
deterrence-only strategists are compelled by their
moral values to reject strategies that would be grossly
disproportionate and indiscriminate. 57(pp5–6,44,69–72)
There are several critical problems with the deterrence-plus strategy. First, it requires weapons and
delivery systems sufficient to penetrate enemy defenses and take out substantial portions of their
nuclear and conventional assets. Second, it requires
extraordinary command, control, communications,
computers, and intelligence (C4I) capabilities that
may not yet have been developed. Third, and very
critical, a counterforce strategy confronts the dilemma of attack with very powerful nuclear weapons on military targets that are collocated with civilian targets. Given the destructive power of
nuclear weapons and the extreme hazards of radioactive fallout, it may be impossible to destroy key
military targets without massive collateral damage.
Such counterforce attacks would obviously be preferable to all-out nuclear attacks that explicitly target cities as such. But, given the difficulties of developing the capabilities necessary for effective
counterforce deterrence and defense and the problem of attacking military targets collocated with
civilian targets, is such a strategy either realistic or
moral?60(pp173–182)
It appears that this question has never really been
answered because the efforts necessary to develop
a credible counterforce capability have not been
made. Moreover, the whole debate over nuclear
deterrence/defense strategy has shifted since the
breakup of the Soviet Union. While Russia, the
Ukraine, and other former Soviet entities still have
nuclear capabilities, they do not presently threaten
the United States and its Western allies. The great
concern now is deterrence/defense aimed at smaller
present and potential nuclear powers, some of them
“rogue” states such as North Korea, Iraq, and Iran.
While these smaller powers do not approach the
level of nuclear capability of the former Soviet
Union, their radical policies force the stable nuclear
powers to rethink their nuclear deterrence/defense
postures. Finally, there is the reality of a serious
Chinese nuclear capability that could pose a greater
threat in the future.
Just war thinkers have had great problems dealing with nuclear dilemmas. A substantial number
reluctantly concede the need for some kind of
nuclear deterrence, but they clearly have in mind a
deterrence-only posture. Deterrence-plus, envisaging possible failure of deterrence and the necessity
for limited nuclear war-fighting, is generally rejected. This, however, leaves those accepting deterrence-only with two serious problems.
First, it means that they offer no moral guidance
for the case of deterrence failing. Indeed, there is a
tendency for just war moralists to place all their
hopes in the success of deterrence while condemning any use of nuclear weapons. In effect, they accept possession and deployment of nuclear deterrence forces but condemn their actual use in war as
immoral. Taken seriously, this would mean that a
deterrence-only posture would be built on a bluff,
which, if called, would collapse. The second serious problem with acceptance of deterrence-only
postures, as noted above, is that it relies on the
threat of extremely disproportionate and indiscriminate nuclear retaliatory actions. It is an uncomfortable position for a moralist to base deterrence on
the threat to do something that, if actually done,
would be profoundly immoral.
Clearly, the dilemmas of nuclear deterrence/defense require a combination of both the war-decision and war-conduct elements of just war doctrine.
In particular, the need to evaluate the proportionality of nuclear deterrence/defense strategies must
finally be made at the war-decision rather than the
war-conduct level. During the Cold War the proportionality of the US/NATO deterrence/defense
posture was based on two things: (1) the threat of
nuclear and conventional attack by the Soviet
Union/Warsaw Pact; and (2) the prospects of a
Communist victory that would reduce free countries to totalitarian rule. It was possible to argue that
the US/NATO nuclear threat and possible execution of it in nuclear war was proportionate to the
need to deter Soviet military aggression and its consequences if successful.
The end of the Cold War removes this particular
case for proportionality of a nuclear deterrent/defense posture. Just war thinkers must now evaluate existing and future cases of nuclear deterrence/
defense postures to judge whether they are warranted by the dual threat of military defeat and
political/ideological subjugation by an enemy.
Given contemporary examples of genocidal conduct
in conflicts inflamed by religious, ideological, racial, and ethnic motives, there is reason to fear that
some nations may plausibly contend that they are
as threatened as the West was by the Soviet Bloc in
the Cold war, perhaps more threatened. Modern just
war doctrine, revived in response to the phenomenon of total war and the nuclear age, is challenged
to continue to search for ways to reconcile the necessities of survival of free societies and the limitations of just war doctrine.
246
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
APPLICATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF WAR AND JUST WAR DOCTRINE
Application of international war-decision law is
almost entirely in the hands of civilian officials.
Legal advisors can counsel these officials on the
content of the law, but decisions with respect to recourse to armed force are political decisions.
Civilian decision makers and their legal advisors
should be aware that each decision about recourse
to force joins the body of state practice, good or bad,
that produces international law. Statesmen contemplating recourse to armed force should recognize
that they may be creating, adding to, or subtracting from the precedents of conventional and customary international law, and that they may have
to live with their own precedents.
With respect to international war-conduct law,
the 1907 Hague Convention IV and the 1949 Geneva
Conventions require the contracting parties to instruct their armed forces to conduct themselves in
consonance with these Conventions. There is a long
tradition in the United States, beginning with the
1863 Lieber Code, to employ documents such as The
Law of Land Warfare as guides to the training and conduct of the US armed forces. In addition, the US armed
forces produce training materials for all ranks and
employ them in training on the law of war. Study of
the law of war has increased quantitatively and qualitatively in the advanced schools of the American
military. Similar developments can be found in such
countries as Canada, Britain, and Germany.
The key to effective training in the law of war is
to relate it realistically to military operations. Such
training should be integral to, not separate from,
overall military training. In military operations responsibility for ensuring observance of the law of
war falls to commanders at all levels. The principle
of command responsibility requires that the commander be responsible for all actions of which he
had knowledge or should have had knowledge.
This is the standard of military professionalism. The
only hope for consistent observance of the law of
war lies in military professionalism, discipline, and
command responsibility at all levels of the armed
forces. The foundations for lawful conduct in war
begin with training and must be maintained
throughout military operations. 20,37,61
Central to the task of enforcing the law of war in
military operations are Rules of Engagement
(ROEs). ROEs guide all aspects of military operations, including matters affected by the law of war.
Responsible commanders issue ROEs and are
obliged to take all necessary measures to see that
they are obeyed. Vigilant oversight throughout the
chain of command is required to ensure compliance
with ROEs. 20(p309),37(p233)
CONCLUSION
Just war doctrine supplements the international
law of war and is increasingly consulted and invoked by military high commands and their civilian superiors. Study of just war has noticeably increased in the US military, for instance at the Army
War College, the Naval War College, the Air University, and the service academies at West Point, Annapolis, and Colorado Springs. The public debates
over the morality of nuclear deterrence/defense
have often involved arguments based on just war
doctrine. In particular, the comprehensive character of just war doctrine with its interlinked wardecision and war-conduct prescriptions has proved
helpful in confronting the complex dilemmas of the
nuclear age.
In free societies, the public and responsible politicians demand that decisions about recourse to war
and the conduct of war be morally justified. There
are many moral approaches to war. Just war doctrine has the advantage of acknowledging the fact
and sometimes the necessity of war while laying
down requirements for initiating and waging war.
It offers moral guidance about war that can be useful at many levels, from high political and military
decision makers, to military commanders and service men and women, to responsible citizens.
Moreover, this guidance has a common sense
quality. The just war requirements for recourse to
armed force raise questions that any responsible
decision maker should be contemplating: What is
the just cause? Where is comparative justice? How
will the war be conducted? Will harm done by the
war be proportionate to the good achieved? What
is the probability of success? Have peaceful alternatives been reasonably exhausted? Are the intentions good or are they too motivated by passions?
These are all questions confronted by decision makers in contemporary crises in the Persian Gulf, in
Bosnia, in Somalia, in Haiti, in Cuba, and in Kosovo.
Multiple crises continue to raise these kinds of questions in many parts of the world.
The international law of war and just war doctrine must be applied by responsible human beings.
Those who make the great decisions regarding re247
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
course to war and its conduct clearly are responsible for applying the international law of war and
for bringing moral perspectives, such as those of
just war doctrine, to their decisions. Down the civilian and military chains of command, each person should be familiar with the law of war and have
thought through the moral requirements of just war
doctrine so that he can contribute as much as possible to the pursuit of policies that reflect the highest values of their country.
REFERENCES
1.
Sherman WT. Memoirs of General William T. Sherman. New York: Da Capo Press; 1984.
2.
Hershey AS. The Essentials of International Public Law and Organization. New York: Macmillan; 1927: 43–44.
3.
Phillipson C. The International Law of Ancient Greece and Rome. Vol 2. London: Longmans, Green; 1948.
4.
Bainton RH. Christian Attitudes Toward War and Peace. New York: Abingdon; 1960.
5.
Poulet DC. A History of the Catholic Church. Vol 1. Raemers SA, trans & ed. St. Louis/London: B Herder; 1934:
115–116.
6.
Ramsey P. War and the Christian Conscience. Durham, NC: Duke University Press; 1961: 15–33.
7.
Khadduri M. The Laws of War and Peace in Islam. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins Press; 1955.
8.
Johnson JT, Kelsay J, eds. Cross, Crescent and Sword. New York: Greenwood; 1990.
9.
Kelsay J, Johnson JT. Just War and Jihad. New York: Greenwood; 1991.
10.
Friedmann W. The Changing Structure of International Law. New York: Columbia University Press; 1964: 306–313.
11.
Singh N. Nuclear Weapons and International Law. New York: Praeger; 1959.
12.
Johnson JT. Ideology, Reason and Limitation of War. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1975.
13.
Aquinas T. Summa theologica, secunda secundae, qu. 40. In: D’Entreves AP, ed. Aquinas: Selected Political Writings. Oxford: Blackwell; 1948: 159–161.
14.
Cited in: Vanderpol A. La Doctrine Scholastique de Droit de Guerre. Paris: Pedone; 1919.
15.
Brierly JL. Law of Nations. 6th ed. Waldock H, ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1963.
16.
Bishop WW Jr. International Law, Cases and Materials. 3rd ed. Boston: Little Brown; 1962.
17.
O’Brien WV. Law and Morality in Israel’s War With the PLO. New York: Routledge; 1991.
18.
Claude IL Jr. Swords Into Plow Shares. 4th ed. New York: Random House; 1984: 150, 157–158, 268–269.
19.
Arend AC, Beck RJ. International Law and the Use of Force. New York: Routledge; 1993.
20.
O’Brien WV. The Conduct of Just and Limited War. New York: Praeger; 1981.
21.
Ramsey P. The Just War: Force and Political Responsibility. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons; 1968.
22.
Johnson JT. Just War Tradition and the Restraint of War: A Moral and Historical Inquiry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press; 1981.
23.
Johnson JT. Can Modern War Be Just? New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press; 1984.
248
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
24.
Walzer M. Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument With Historical Illustrations. New York: Basic Books; 1977.
25.
Murray JC. We Hold These Truths: Catholic Reflections on the American Proposition. New York: Sheed & Ward;
1960: 249–273.
26.
National Conference of Catholic Bishops. The Challenge of Peace. Washington, DC: US Catholic Conference; 3
May 1983.
27.
US Department of the Air Force. International Law—The Conduct of Armed Conflict and Air Operations. Washington, DC: Department of the Air Force; 19 November 1976. Air Force Pamphlet 110-31.
28.
Hyde CC. International Law, Chiefly as Interpreted and Applied by the United States. 2nd rev ed, Vol 3. Boston:
Little, Brown; 1947.
29.
O’Brien WV. ‘Military necessity’ in international law. World Polity: A Yearbook of Studies in International Law and
Organization. Vol 1. Utrecht: Spectrum/The Institute of World Polity; Washington, DC: Georgetown University;
1957: 119–128.
30.
O’Brien WV. The PLO in international law. Boston Univ Int Law J. 1984;3:349–413.
31.
Geneva Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Relating to the Protection of
Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 12 December 1977. UN Doc. A/32/144. Int Leg Materials.
1977;16:1442–1449.
32.
Geneva Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Relating to the Protection of the
Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II), 12 December 1977. UN Doc. A/32/144. Int Leg
Materials. 1977;16:1442–1449.
33.
The Declaration of St. Petersburg, 29 November 1868. Am J Int Law. 1907;Suppl 1:95–96.
34.
Hague Convention IV Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land, 18 October 1907, 36 Stat. 2277; Treaty
Series no. 539; Malloy Treaties, Vol. II.
35.
Hague Convention (IV,3) Concerning Expanding Bullets, 29 July 1899. Am J Int Law. 1907;Suppl 1:155.
36.
Department of the Army. The Law of Land Warfare. Washington, DC: DA; July 1956. Field Manual 27-10.
37.
Lewy G. America in Vietnam. New York: Oxford University Press; 1978.
38.
Geneva Convention on Prohibition or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, October, 1980. UN Doc. A/CONF/95/
15. Int Leg Materials. 1980;19:1523.
39.
Protocol to Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I); Protocol on Prohibition or Restrictions on the Use of Mines,
Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II), annexed to the 1980 Weapons Convention.
40.
Smart JK. History of chemical and biological warfare: An American perspective. In: Sidell FR, Takafuji ET,
Franz DR, eds. Medical Aspects of Chemical and Biological Warfare. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington,
DC: Office of The Surgeon General and Borden Institute; 1997: 9–86.
41.
Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous, or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, 17 June 1925. 26 UST 571; TIAS 8061; 94 LNTS 65. US ratification, 10 April
1975.
42.
Geneva Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and Their Destruction, 10 April 1972. 26 UST 57, TIAS 8062.
249
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War
43.
Paris Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, 13 January 1993. Int Leg Materials. 1993;31:800.
44.
Krepon M. Chemical weapons ban, imperfect, essential. Washington Post. 24 July 1994; C7.
45.
Gordon MR, Trainor BE. The Generals’ War: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf. Boston: Little, Brown; 1995:
47, 128, 362–368.
46.
United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Arms Control and Disarmament Agreements. Washington,
DC: US Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; 1990.
47.
Levie HS. Prisoners of war in international armed conflict. International Law Studies. Vol 59. Newport, RI: US
Naval War College; 1978.
48.
Levie HS. Documents on prisoners of war. International Law Studies. Vol 60. Newport, RI: US Naval War College; 1979.
49.
Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, 12 August 1949. 6 UST 316; TIAS 3364l; 75
UNTS 135 (1956).
50.
Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the
Field, 12 August 1949. 6 UST 314; TIAS 3362; 75 UNTS 31 (1956)
51.
Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded and Sick and Shipwrecked Members of
the Armed Forces at Sea, 12 August 1949. 6 UST 3217; TIAS 3363; 75 UNTS 85 (1956).
52.
1907 Hague Convention No. IV Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land. Annex to the Convention.
Regulations Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land. Section III. Military Authority over the Territory of the Hostile State, Articles 42–56. 18 October 1907. 36 Stat. 2277; Treaty Series No. 539; Malloy Treaties,
Vol. II, p. 2269.
53.
Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, 12 August 1949. 6 UST 3316;
TIAS 3364; 75 UNTS 135 (1956).
54.
Feilchenfeld EH. The International Economic Law of Belligerent Occupation. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment of International Peace; 1942.
55.
McDougal MS, Feliciano FP. Law and Minimum World Public Order. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press;
1961: 732–832.
56.
McCormick RA. Morality of war. New Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol 14. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1967.
57.
Snow DM. Nuclear Deterrence in a Dynamic World. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press; 1981: 69–85.
58.
Friedberg AL. A history of US strategic doctrine 1945 to 1980. J Strategic Stud. 1980;3:37–71.
59.
Smoke R. National Security and the Nuclear Dilemma. Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley; 1984: 175–250.
60.
O’Brien WV. The failure of deterrence and the conduct of war. In: O’Brien W, Langan J, eds. The Nuclear Dilemma and the Just War. Lexington, Mass: Lexington Books; 1986: 153–197.
61.
Parks WH. Command responsibility for war crimes. Mil Law Rev. 1973;62:1–104.
250
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
