Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
331
Chapter 12
MIXED AGENCY IN MILITARY MEDICINE:
ETHICAL ROLES IN CONFLICT
EDMUND G. HOWE, MD, JD*
INTRODUCTION
MILITARY ROLE-SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
Military Mission and Treatment Priorities for Combat Fatigue
The Administration of Unproven Pharmaceuticals
Treating and Conserving the Fighting Strength
Counseling and Utilization of Irradiated Soldiers
Overview
SITUATIONS INVOLVING DISCRETION
Balancing the Needs of the Military With the Needs of Patients
Using Discretion When Treating Soldiers With Marginal Problems
Counseling Soldiers With HIV Who Endanger Third Parties
Meeting the Clinical Needs of Soldiers With Psychological Disorders
Prioritizing the Needs of Patients Over the Needs of the Military
Overview
THE EMOTIONAL EFFECT OF ROLE CONFLICT
CONCLUSION
ATTACHMENT: EVOLUTION OF INFORMED CONSENT
*Formerly Major, Medical Corps, United States Army; currently, Director, Programs in Ethics, Professor of Psychiatry, and Associate Professor of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, Maryland 20814; and Chair,
Committee of Department of Defense Ethics Consultants to the Surgeons General
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
332
Franklin Boggs
Pill Call
circa 1944
“Soldiers suffering from malaria get their daily quota of atabrine tablets from the Medical Corps captain. Artist
Boggs caught this scene in the South Pacific.” This image clearly captures the doctor, attired in his crisp uniform,
clipboard in hand, dispensing medicine to protect and “conserve the fighting force.” Caption written by Major Clarence
Worden, Medical Department of the United States Army. In: Mackenzie D. Men Without Guns. Philadelphia: The
Blakiston Co; 1945: Plate 4. Illustrated with 137 plates from the Abbott Collection of paintings owned by the United
States Government.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
333
INTRODUCTION
that would depart from military law or regulations.
Conversely, military physicians adopting an exclusively medical role-specific ethic would strictly
follow the principles of the medical profession that
generally require physicians to put their patients’
interests first. Their always adopting a medical rolespecific ethic could result in their failing to uphold
the military requirements they and their patients
have sworn to serve. These requirements include
their willingness to sacrifice their life for their country, if necessary. Both soldiers and military physicians know or should know this when they enter
the military. In general, soldiers understand and
expect that military physicians will sacrifice a
soldier’s individual interest for the sake of the mission or greater numbers of soldiers if necessary.
The military physician, at least implicitly, promises to support the mission or greater good when
and if this is necessary, even if this requires subordinating the medical well-being of the individual
soldier. Soldiers do not, of course, willingly give
their lives so that the war can be lost. A soldier
makes such a sacrifice only with the expectation that
all measures possible will be taken by everyone in
the military, physicians included, to ensure that if
soldiers must die, it will have been for a valid reason. This is respecting soldiers as individuals because they autonomously choose to sacrifice for a
greater good, even to the point of making the supreme sacrifice of giving their lives.
On what grounds, however, could ethical stances
that deviate from the law be justified? The answer
to this question will depend, in part, on which of
two views one has regarding the potential that ethical analysis has for discerning sound moral views.
One view is that ethical analysis can provide “right”
answers. This view is problematic because different core values may have comparable merit such
that the issue of which core value should prevail
cannot be resolved. This is especially true in a pluralistic society such as the United States in which
values are highly variable. A second view (whose
claim for what ethical analysis can do is more modest) is that ethical reasoning cannot provide right
answers, but, in comparison to alternative approaches, it is the best approach available for resolving problems in which competing values conflict.
This claim presupposes that ethical analysis results
in the highest proportion of ethically sound outcomes,
though whether it has achieved the best outcome
in any one case cannot be discerned. This more
modest claim underlies the analyses in this chapter.
In the second condition under which ethical diThis chapter will discuss ethical issues military
physicians face when they confront conflicting loyalties between those they owe to their patients and
those required by the military. These conflicts are
referred to as problems involving “mixed agency.”1
This is the source of much of the tension discussed
in the two preceding chapters and in several of the
other chapters in these two volumes.
Mixed agency has been one of the most significant ethical issues in military medicine throughout
the ages and has become of more interest to civilian
physicians in recent decades. Physicians acting as
employees of institutions (ie, penal systems, professional sports teams, and managed care organizations)
face many of these issues. Similarities between military and civilian ethical issues will be noted in this
discussion, but the primary focus will be on examining these conflicts from a military perspective.
These ethical dilemmas for military physicians
arise under two conditions. The first occurs when
military physicians’ ethical choices and the requirements of the law or regulations conflict. The second arises when their ethical choices are not addressed by the law or military regulations. In the
first condition, it might be presumed that military
physicians’ departing from the law or regulations
is always unethical. The example of Nazi physicians’ following German law during World War II
indicates that this is not always the case. Thus, the
law does not always determine what is ethically
appropriate. Additionally, ethical questions are not
always resolved by law or regulations for other reasons. For example, the law may be too general because, by necessity, it pertains to large groups of
people. Therefore, if physicians follow the law
strictly, they may be unable to meet many individual patients’ exceptional needs.
Military physicians could follow the letter of the
law by pursuing what is referred to as a role-specific ethic. (A role-specific ethic involves a person’s
adhering strictly to the requirements of a given role
and exercising no discretion.) Military physicians
adopting a military role-specific ethic would strictly
follow duties required by military law or regulations, or as dictated by their superior officers. An
example of physicians in civilian practice following a role-specific ethic is when they report a case
of suspected child abuse. They do not exercise any
discretion in these situations; they simply follow
the requirements placed on them by society. If military physicians adopt a military role-specific ethic,
they would never exercise discretion and never engage in any action to meet their patients’ needs2,3
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
334
lemmas arise (when ethical choices are not addressed by the law or military regulations), the
law’s requirements are minimal: The law does not
indicate the extent to which military physicians
optimally should go to meet their patients’ needs.
The law states only what they must do legally, not
what ethically they should do. The law requires a
minimum acceptable standard, while ethics sets a
somewhat higher standard. An example in civilian
law is the “good samaritan” law. Physicians may
not legally be required to stop at an accident scene
to assist persons who are injured, but there may be
innumerable instances in which they should do so.
To discern what is ethically best for their patients
as opposed to merely permissible in such instances,
military physicians cannot rely solely on the law.
They must use ethical analysis.
There are many methods for ethical analysis (see
Chapter 2, Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure). Deciding which to use and how
to apply it to ranking different visions of the good
is very difficult. When there are competing values,
all of which are reasonable and important, no ethical theory can provide such a ranking. Rather, ethical analysis can suggest the relevant facts and ethical values that should be under consideration. I
contend that ethical analysis, using whatever
method is chosen, can supply a method for making
decisions that over the long run throughout many
decisions will result in overall “better” decisions.
Ethical analysis will not necessarily determine,
however, that the best decision is reached in a given
particular case.
The question that arises, then, is what should
decision makers do when, having assessed all the
relevant facts and values that should be considered,
no clear “superior” ethical answer emerges. The
question then changes from what the answer should
be to who should decide the question. Here there
may be no “superior” ethical answer, but there usually will be a compromise on which all or at least
most can agree. Most agree, for example, that it
would be better for a decision to be made by a duly
authorized person or by a vote than by physical
violence among those who disagree. In the military
this authority resides in the President, as Commanderin-Chief of the Armed Forces, and in subordinate
commanders within the chain of command. For
decisions involving involuntary treatment or hospitalization of Army members, the Secretary of the
Army is empowered to make these decisions. 4 Typically, however, the Secretary of the Army does not
exercise this authority, but allows significant latitude for decision making within the patient–physician relationship.
Many, if not most, of the more difficult ethical
dilemmas military physicians encounter involve
situations in which they face conflicting loyalties.
These dilemmas are not different in principle from
those faced by civilian physicians. 5,6 For instance,
when physicians work in institutions such as prisons, they face a conflict between meeting the interests of inmates whom they see as patients and the
interests of the prison system. Suppose, for example, that they grant all inmates who claim to feel
ill an excuse from work. Other inmates are likely to
do the same, feigning illness in increasingly large
numbers, resulting in a “floodgate” effect. If the
prison work program is to continue to function (and
there are many good reasons why it should), these
physicians may have no choice but to excuse inmates from work only when there are objective findings of medical conditions. As a result, some inmates who genuinely feel sick but who do not
present with objective findings, such as those who
have stomach pain, might not be excused and might
have to continue to work, even though they are
genuinely ill.
Highly analogous conflicting loyalties occur in
the military. However, the conflicting obligations
military physicians face generally are greater in
both magnitude and frequency than those faced by
their civilian counterparts. 7–9 These differences exist for several reasons, but the primary reason is that
the stakes in the military are much higher. 10 For instance, if increasing numbers of soldiers are excused
from duty by feigning illness, the ability of the military to accomplish its mission will be diminished.
It is even possible that the war could be lost, and
that the society that depends on its military for protection could be destroyed. In that event, the number of civilians killed may be in the millions. This
possibility is illustrated by World War II, where
extraordinary numbers of persons would have died
if Nazi Germany had won the war, and then implemented its genocidal policies in the additional countries it had conquered.
Such calamitous outcomes must be prevented.
All persons in the military, including physicians,
share the priority of preventing these outcomes.
They agreed to uphold the primacy of the military
mission, at least implicitly, when they joined the
military. Nonetheless, when individual patients’
interests are at stake and they compete with the
goals of saving large numbers of soldiers’ lives or
winning a battle, a conflict may exist between the
traditional civilian priority of meeting patients’
needs above all else and the military priority of first
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
335
and foremost meeting the needs of the military mission. Which interests, the military’s or the patient’s,
should take priority when they conflict? This chapter will explore this issue in some detail. It will also
address the military physician’s moral angst sometimes generated by these ethical conflicts and how
understanding why some of these conflicts can’t be
“better” resolved may affect them.
In this chapter, I shall suggest that when a conflict exists between the military’s and the patients’
interests, these situations are best understood by
considering them as falling into two categories. The
first category is one in which military physicians
should exercise no discretion because the needs of
the military should be absolute. The second category
is one in which they should exercise discretion because the needs of the military are not absolute.
There is one additional category that will be mentioned, but only in passing. This category is one in
which military physicians should exercise no discretion because patients’ interests warrant exclusive
priority (ie, a medical-role specific ethic). An example of this latter category would be a commander’s
request to review patients’ charts in an attempt to
gain information that could help discern who is
homosexual. Although this has been done in the
past, the physician should refuse the commander’s
request as the rights of the patients involved clearly
warrant priority.
I shall also suggest a counterintuitive possibility, namely that it may be ethically possible and
optimal to meet both patients’ needs and those of
the military even when these needs are mutually
exclusive. The classic example is when military
physicians treat soldiers who are homosexual. Military physicians may choose not to report such soldiers’ homosexual behavior even though military
regulations deem homosexual behavior unlawful.
The military’s having these regulations but military
physicians ignoring them may most further two
mutually exclusive ultimate ends: (1) military physicians may maintain soldiers’ trust, on one hand,
by protecting their confidentiality, and (2) the regulations may deter overt homosexual behavior, on
the other.
These categories are approximate as opposed to
absolute. It is my hope that if military physicians
use this framework of analysis, benefits to the military and to patients will be furthered. It is also my
hope that better frameworks will be developed in
the future.
The vast majority of these conflicts can and
should be resolved in the patient’s best interest. This
is because patients’ needs should be compromised
only when necessary. This is also in the military’s
interest because to the extent individual soldiers can
be and are respected as individuals, the military as
an institution rests on higher moral ground. There
are some situations, however, where overarching
military necessities must prevail, even at the risk
of harm to the soldier. This is the nature of military
medicine. If society may be destroyed by acting in
the patient’s interest, then it will be necessary to
follow the military role-specific ethic and military
physicians should use no discretion. In civilian
medicine, there are, indeed, pressures (such as financial or contractual concerns) to place interests
other than those of the patient first. However, the
overriding urgency and necessity of protecting society and the lives of millions of its members is a
much stronger argument for the military subordinating patients’ interests.
These contrasting circumstances are what make
the mixed agency of military physicians dramatically different from that of civilian physicians. Accordingly, I will discuss situations requiring strict
adherence to the military role-specific ethic first. It
is important to remember, however, that these situations are quite uncommon and, at their core, involve the survival of society and its members as
described above. This point bears repeating: Military physicians in the course of their military service are not likely to have to make many choices
that place the needs of the military ahead of those
of the patient. However, if and when that situation
arises, military physicians ideally will have thought
about it and will understand why they must do it,
whether or not they personally agree.
MILITARY ROLE-SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
The following scenarios are examples of situations in which there may be an overriding requirement to sacrifice the interests of individual soldiers
to serve the greater good of allowing the society to
survive. The rationales for military physicians’ decisions are analogous to those of soldiers being willing
to give their lives in the service of their country.
Military Mission and Treatment Priorities for
Combat Fatigue
Military physicians should wholly delegate their
decision-making authority when they treat soldiers
on the battlefield for combat fatigue. Military physicians, usually psychiatrists in this situation, are
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
336
expected to give such patients food, shelter, and,
most importantly, the expectation that they will return to duty. 11 (This approach is referred to as “three
hots [hot meals] and a cot [for sleeping]” in military jargon.)
The question has been raised whether military
physicians are abandoning the tenets of the medical profession when they violate these patients’
autonomy. Specifically, when they treat soldiers
with the expectation that they will return to combat they do not impartially inform them of their
condition as they might if they were civilians. In
civilian contexts patients should, in general, be told
the truth and be fully informed, and then allowed
to choose what they will do. Military physicians
could remain more neutral in their interactions with
these patients. They could give such soldiers information regarding their illness and its possible
course, including the impact of returning or not returning to combat. By doing this in an impartial
manner, they would have less influence on soldiers’
expectations and emotions, and thus would not
implicitly manipulate them to return to their unit
and to combat. 12
There is a compelling reason for military physicians not choosing this more neutral position. Military physicians excusing these soldiers from further
duty could result in inordinate numbers of other
soldiers following suit (ie, the “floodgate” effect),
which could be fatal to the combat effort. In the case
of combat fatigue, it is even more likely than in the
prison scenario that there would be a “floodgate”
phenomenon.
In these cases, combat fatigue could dramatically
increase in incidence once evacuation is begun because combat is so life-threatening that the normal
response under these conditions is to do whatever
one can to survive. Intentional self-wounding is one
example of this occurring consciously. With combat fatigue, it is possible that soldiers could consciously feign combat fatigue signs and symptoms
in an effort to escape the dangers of combat. It is
more likely, however, that there would be many
more cases in which there is an unconscious generation of these signs and symptoms. This is analogous to mass hysteria situations such as those that
periodically arise in high schools where students,
in increasing numbers, report headaches, fatigue,
or nausea, even though no cause can be found for
their symptoms. In the case of combat fatigue, the
soldiers may be unconsciously seeking an honorable exit from the stress of combat. Therefore, the
practice of returning soldiers who have experienced
combat fatigue to their units is required for effectively continuing the mission. This requirement
exists, not only in situations of overriding and immediate military demands, but in all instances of
combat fatigue.
It is coincidentally fortunate that the long-term
psychiatric morbidity is lessened by soldiers returning to their units. Returning these soldiers to combat can decrease their subsequent psychiatric morbidity by decreasing the incidence of “survivor
guilt,” as long as they survive combat. As Jones has
noted,
[i]t is important to remember that most psychiatric
casualties are soldiers who, because of the influence
of negative psychological, social, and physiological factors, unconsciously seek a medical exit from
combat.…Improperly treated through evacuation,
the symptoms may persist or worsen, developing
characteristics of traumatic neurosis (chronic posttraumatic stress disorder). 13(pp37–38)
Although this decreased morbidity is offered by
some as a justification for treating patients with
combat fatigue with “three hots and a cot,” this rationale is conceptually invalid. This reduction in
psychiatric morbidity by returning soldiers to their
units is only a fortunate side effect. It is not a substantive justification because soldiers given a choice
between risking dying due to remaining in combat
or remaining behind in patient status might well
choose the latter. Thus, treating soldiers with combat fatigue with return-to-duty expectation cannot
be in these soldiers’ best interest when they may
see their best interest (rightfully) as staying alive.
An inextricably related ethical question arising
in this context is whether military physicians should
ever inform soldiers prior to entering combat about
this ethical conflict (ie, treating them for combat
fatigue by giving them the expectation that they will
return to duty or respecting their autonomy by informing them of the possible outcomes more neutrally). Full disclosure would require this, and any
practice that depends for its success on a practice
remaining secret is ethically questionable and empirically likely to be short-lived.
Having said that, it must be acknowledged that
some medical practices based on keeping information secret have indeed never become public knowledge and thus have remained effective. An example
is physicians treating patients with somatization
disorder (which involves their treating psychogenic
physical symptoms) by scheduling regular visits.
These visits are intended to reduce these patients’
dependency needs, which are presumed to underlie their symptoms. These patients continue to opMixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
337
erate on the assumption, however, that their regular visits with their physicians are based on their
physical needs. 14
Likewise, the success of treating soldiers with the
expectation that they will return to duty depends
on their not knowing the psychological basis for this
treatment. Thus, to meet the military’s needs during combat, the military physician, in complicity
with other medical personnel also familiar with this
strategy, must not only attempt to influence soldiers
by conveying this expectation but must also withhold from them the reasoning behind this treatment.
Although this is deceit by omission, this deceit is
nonetheless necessary. Physicians and others must
not inform soldiers prior to entering the military
that this conflict could exist. They absolutely must
not inform them prior to engaging in combat, because the unique needs of the military mission may
require that the soldiers not know about the deceit.
If soldiers know of this deceit because they have
been informed beforehand, military doctors may
not be believed later when they communicate the
expectation that soldiers will return to combat.
The Administration of Unproven Pharmaceuticals
A more recent example in which a military rolespecific ethic may be necessary is that of the role of
military physicians in the administration of vaccines or other preventive measures that have been
ordered for the protection of the military and its
mission.
Requiring Soldiers to Take These Agents
During the Persian Gulf War (1990–1991) soldiers
were required to take agents to protect them from
the enemy’s possible use of biological and chemical warfare weapons, though these protective agents
had not been fully tested for this purpose. 15 To subject human research subjects to the effects of biological or chemical weaponry would, of course, be
unconscionable because this would involve subjecting them to weaponry that could seriously harm or
even kill them. Thus there is no practical method
for testing human subjects to conclusively prove the
safety and efficacy of these agents used in this warfare context.
At that time it was feared, and not without cause,
that Iraq would launch missiles containing biological or chemical agents, even though this would have
violated international law. After the end of the war,
investigation revealed that Iraq, indeed, had prepared missiles containing these agents and that they
were ready to be launched. Fortunately, for whatever reason, Iraq did not use these weapons. Nevertheless, the threat of Iraq using biological and
chemical weapons was quite real.
Appreciating these actual circumstances helps to
illustrate why soldiers were required by the military to take these preventive measures and why this
and similar future requirements may be not only
ethically justifiable but obligatory. At the time of
the Persian Gulf War, the most knowledgeable military and civilian authorities believed that the risk/
benefit ratio of these agents was overwhelmingly
favorable to soldiers. Between August and December of 1990, many meetings were held at the Pentagon by Department of Defense (DoD) and Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) experts on these agents.
These meetings also included representatives from
the Office for Protection From Research Risks of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National
Security Agency (NSA), the Department of Justice
(DOJ), the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB), and others. The Secretaries of the Department of Defense and Health and Human Services
(HHS) were also personally involved (as was I, to
give ethical input).
On 30 October 1990, the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Health Affairs informed the Assistant
Secretary for Health of the Department of Health
and Human Services that for “some…risks, the best
preventive…treatment” calls for the use of new
drugs, but that during combat, if the enemy might
use a potentially deadly weapon such as nerve gas,
the military’s deferring to soldiers’ personal preference not to take a preventive drug that may save
their lives was simply “not acceptable.”16
The FDA in response to this need established
specific requirements on 21 December 1990 that, if
met, allowed military physicians no discretion.
These requirements included a broad-based review
board having to assess several factors, such as the
new drug’s safety and efficacy and the absence of a
satisfactory alternative. 17
President Clinton signed an executive order
implementing this same approach on 30 September
1999. 18 (The three are presented in the Attachment
following the chapter.)
Prior to the combat phase of the Persian Gulf War,
the military, the FDA, and others concluded, then,
that military physicians may have to give soldiers
some drugs without offering them the option of
refusing to take them. This policy19,20 remains in
force today: All soldiers are required to take anthrax
vaccine whether or not they give their prior consent. 21
Military authorities believed that the use of these
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
338
unproven agents was not only the best but the only
means of protecting US troops in the Persian Gulf
if Iraq chose to use this weaponry. The problem with
the agents, however, was that they had not been
fully tested on humans. Based on ethical standards
applied in civilian medical settings, in contrast, soldiers would have been totally justified in refusing
to take these prophylactic agents unless they gave
prior informed consent.
What should have happened to soldiers if they
refused to take these agents? Should military physicians have respected their refusal or have reported
them for refusing to comply with military requirements? In the event military physicians reported them,
the soldiers could be court-martialed. Why? This is
because the entire force could have been decimated
had Iraq used these weapons on unprotected troops.
Further, inordinate additional numbers of civilians
might have been killed if Iraq had prevailed in this
war. Thus, military physicians had, and should have
had, an absolute obligation to force soldiers to take
these agents or face punitive repercussions.
The ethical justification of military physicians
being required to act in this manner is valid only as
long as the two underlying assumptions are correct.
The first assumption is that the use of these agents
should protect soldiers significantly in the event of
exposure to a biological or chemical warfare agent.
The second assumption is that taking such a protective agent should cause substantially less risk of
harm to them than suffering the effects of a biological or chemical warfare agent. However, if it were
found that a protective agent such as anthrax vaccine would not protect soldiers from airborne anthrax to the degree that it is now believed it would,
or that it would cause significant adverse side effects, this justification might no longer exist. Thus
if the factual assumptions underlying the present
ethical priorities are no longer valid, these priorities would probably change as well.
The empirical assumptions made regarding the
safety and efficacy of the anthrax vaccine have, in
fact, been challenged. 22 Furthermore, in the future
it is possible that new biological and chemical weaponry will be developed at a pace that far outstrips
a nation’s capacity to develop prophylactic agents
in response to these new threats. Were this to occur, the obligatory use of preventive measures
(whose anticipated benefits would be no more than
marginal and whose potential risks are serious but
unknown) might no longer be ethically justifiable.
However, even if the expected benefit is only marginal, this marginal contribution to the war effort
could make the difference in the outcome of the war.
Thus military physicians could still have an absolute
obligation to require soldiers to take these prophylactic agents, even under these significantly different
circumstances. Further, this should be the decision
of superior officers who are more fully informed
and have a wider perspective than military physicians in regard to what is necessary for the military
to succeed. Therefore, military physicians should
adopt a military role-specific ethic when making
decisions in regard to giving these agents.
Truth Telling in the Combat Theater
In civilian settings in the United States physicians
now have an absolute obligation in almost all contexts to tell their patients the truth. This has not always been the case, however. Several decades ago,
US physicians believed that they should withhold
from patients certain dire diagnoses, for instance
that they have cancer. Today, physicians’ withholding this information generally is considered unconscionable. The primary exception to this is when a
physician is convinced that patients’ receiving this
information would be unduly harmful to them.
Physicians may be ethically and legally justified in
withholding the truth under these circumstances.
Ethically, this withholding is justifiable on the basis of its furthering the patient’s best interest. In
ethics this is commonly referred to as “paternalism.” Legally, physicians having this discretion is
permitted under the doctrine of physicians’ “therapeutic privilege.” It is unclear whether the present
priority given to telling the truth will prove timeless or not. It has increasingly been criticized as falling short of meeting all patients’ needs optimally.
It precludes physicians adapting to what patients
individually most need or want. 23 If a physician
doesn’t tell the truth, a patient could sue, but the
patient will have to prove that the physician unduly violated his or her therapeutic privilege. Finally, physicians also have been sued successfully
for telling patients too much (truthful) information.
Under exceptional circumstances during combat,
the overriding importance of the principle of truth
telling may become more open to question as the
risk of truth telling poses a greater risk to larger
numbers of soldiers. It may be that this principle of
veracity should be subordinated, not on the basis
of patients’ welfare but for the benefit of the military.
During the Persian Gulf War, for example, available supplies of the prophylactic agents to protect
soldiers from botulism were insufficient. 24 As a result of this deficiency, the question arose whether
military physicians should tell their troops this
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
339
truth. What they should have done in this instance,
and should now do in the event that a similar question arises, should depend in large part on the underlying empirical assumptions that are made and
how it is anticipated that soldiers would react to
this information.
It would not be inconceivable to imagine that
soldiers told this truth might be upset. In the Persian Gulf War, soldiers first were told that they
would receive an initial vaccine for botulism, with
subsequent boosters. When the supplies became
limited, they were told that the initial dose would
suffice. Soldiers were understandably upset. Nevertheless, as their behavior subsequently confirmed,
they were not so upset that they were unwilling to
fight. They were angry (as some who had been
present shared with me later) but continued to serve
and serve effectively.
Military physicians could not have predicted
with absolute certainty that soldiers would respond
in this manner as opposed to becoming so alarmed
that they were not combat ready. Presumably, these
soldiers believed what their physicians subsequently told them. They believed (despite what
their physicians had said initially) that if Iraq used
these missiles, the single dose would substantially
protect them.
Despite this specific example from the Persian
Gulf War, it is nonetheless possible that if physicians had told their troops that repeated doses of
vaccines were unavailable, they would have panicked and refused to fight. However, if they were
not told and this truth about the vaccine shortage
“leaked out,” they would have felt deceived. Then
these soldiers also may have lost faith in their commanders and refused to continue to fight.
The issue of whether soldiers should be told the
truth when their reaction cannot be predicted
should be left to commanders. Military physicians
are not privy to all of the information required to
make the best command decisions. For this same
reason, physicians’ obligation to do what their commanders decide as opposed to exercising discretion
generally should be absolute.
Treating and Conserving the Fighting Strength
Military physicians’ obligation to treat soldiers
with the goal of conserving the fighting strength is
most clearly seen in three arenas: (1) treating soldiers to return to duty; (2) setting treatment priorities in triage situations; and (3) removing unstable
soldiers from combat. Each of these arenas will be
discussed separately.
Treatment to Return Soldiers to Duty
The primary scenario that all military physicians
train and prepare for is that of treating soldiers
during combat. In that setting they may have to treat
injuries or illnesses so that these soldiers regain the
capacity to return to combat. There, they will fight
the enemy and possibly die. In this situation, these
physicians violate these patients’ best medical interests by providing a chain in the link of causation
that may lead to their death by hostile forces. Military physicians’ furthering soldiers’ deaths, even
indirectly, violates the priority physicians give in
civilian contexts to saving their patients’ lives.
Situations in which commanders decide to return
ill or injured soldiers to combat are very rare and
are situations in which the military requirements
are so significant that the alternatives cannot be allowed. This situation occurred, for example, in
Burma (in the South Pacific theater of operations)
during World War II. Commanders decided that
soldiers with high fevers due to malaria should
nonetheless return to the front to continue fighting.
“[T]he medical officers of the outfit…[were] pushed
aside….One stated, ‘[o]ur hands are tied,’ but ‘that
there is a very high probability that these are cases
of developing liver abscesses and tuberculosis as well
as other serious complications among the men.’”25(p379)
Though physicians went along with the commanders’ orders, later some high-ranking military physicians contended that all military physicians
should have refused to treat these soldiers under
these conditions. 25 Hopkins, Stelling, and Voorhees
state, “If pressure from high ranking field officers can
be applied to…such an extent…[then these]…
medical officers are robbed of sacred duties and
rights to which their professional knowledge and
service entitles them.”25(p380)
Contentions such as Stelling’s are ethically open
to challenge, however, for several reasons, including those already discussed. First, physicians do not
have all the information accessible to commanders
regarding the military’s needs. Second, physicians
lack expertise in deciding how battles should be
won; commanders hold this expertise. And third,
military effectiveness requires a clear chain of authority and decision making, of which physicians
are not a part. Thus, even though commanders’
decisions may be wrong in some instances, maintaining this chain of authority is far preferable for
bringing about an ultimately successful outcome
than allowing subordinates, including those who
are physicians, to defy this structure if and when
they see fit. The one exception is when the orders
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
340
or war are ethically unjustifiable, as in the case of
the Nazis.
The ethical rationale for this conclusion is referred to in philosophic terms as rule-utilitarian
reasoning. Rule-utilitarian reasoning recognizes the
utilitarian position (see Chapter 2, Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure) that the ethically correct action is that action that maximizes the
overall good and minimizes the overall harm. It also
recognizes that it may be preferable to have a general rule that will maximize the good. This rule will
take precedence over a specific action even if that
action may yield a greater good in a specific circumstance because the overall good is maximized
by generally following the rule.
In instances such as the one that occurred with
malaria-infected soldiers in the South Pacific during World War II it would be possible for military
physicians themselves to decide which soldiers
should return to duty using the physicians’ medical expertise and judgment. The result, however,
could significantly impair the operational effectiveness of the war effort. Alternatively, military physicians could, should, and generally do leave these
decisions to commanders who, as stated, have a
greater overall picture of the combat situation. This
follows rule-utilitarian reasoning: A commander
may make the wrong decision in a given circumstance, but by allowing commanders to make these
decisions in general, the overall war effort should
be significantly enhanced.
This is further illustrated by a second example.
This one involved forces fighting at Guadalcanal.
There they encountered well-entrenched Japanese
soldiers. However, malaria infection rates approached 90% in some units of the American 1st
Marine Division, in part because of poor compliance among soldiers in taking Atabrine, a synthetic
antimalarial, and also because the topography of
the island helped spread the disease. 26 Tactical considerations prompted the commander, General
Vandegrift, to order doctors “not to excuse soldiers
with temperatures of 103°F or less….”26(p124) If military physicians had not deferred to the commanders, the island of Guadalcanal might not have been
taken, and the overall outcome of the war might
have been changed.
Military physicians in this situation and many
of those that follow face the agonizing choice of
protecting soldiers at the price of others being
harmed or not protecting the soldier and by doing
so sacrificing one’s loyalty to the soldier-patient.
Obviously, the argument for erring one way as opposed to the other shifts in relative moral weight
as the magnitude of harm and the numbers of potentially harmed changes.
In summary, military physicians delegating their
moral judgments to their superiors in this way, and
thus allowing themselves to play this role in the
chain of causation that may lead to soldiers’ death,
contradicts the general civilian medical professional
commitment to saving lives. Emotionally, they are
predisposed and accustomed to putting patients
first. Consequently, in this military context, they
may feel exorbitantly distressed and this distress
may take a toll. (What this toll is and how it can be
addressed I shall discuss briefly at the end of this
chapter.)
Yet, whereas military physicians delegate their
moral judgments in one way, in another way they
do not. Rather, they retain their own moral vision
but choose to give others’ vision priority, much as
Socrates chose to give even his life because his moral
vision was that the highest value involved respecting the authority of the state. That is, one can retain a moral vision but knowingly defer this because
one believes a better outcome or higher value is
achieved by deferring some decisions to others
whether or not one personally believes they are
right. This position ethically is known as rule-utilitarian ethics. As mentioned previously, this approach
accepts the premise that to most benefit many, this
may require that there be some submaximal results
in individual cases. Practically, this approach would
require that individual military physicians defer
what they believe right to others, perhaps those
with more information or who are more knowledgeable about possible outcomes than they.
Treatment Priorities in Triage Situations
In the Burma and Guadalcanal incidents (discussed in the above section on treatment to return
soldiers to duty) military physicians did not exercise discretion, but rather did exactly as they were
ordered. This was appropriate because their commanders were in a far better position to understand
the military situation and whether the limited effectiveness of soldiers who were sick with illnesses
such as malaria would be necessary for the battle
to be won.
Similarly, in triage scenarios military physicians
may have to ignore their own moral predispositions, even though they know that this will directly
result in soldiers dying (as opposed to “merely”
facing this possibility by treating them and, thus,
“allowing” their commanders to return them to
battle). This occurs when medical aid stations are
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
341
overwhelmed with casualties and medical personnel must give priority to the treatment of soldiers
who can return to combat. This priority requires
postponing treatment of patients who are more critically ill or injured but could survive if treated in a
timely manner.
This scenario also occurs when there is a shortage of materiel, such as medications, as opposed to
a shortage of medical personnel. A well-known situation demonstrating this point occurred during
World War II. When penicillin first became available, but supplies were limited, military physicians
gave the limited supplies of penicillin available to
soldiers who had venereal disease so that with this
cure they could return to the front and fight effectively. As a result of this policy, others, with illnesses
such as pneumonia who could have survived, instead died. 27 Although the commander has the responsibility for these decisions, physicians must
carry them out. Physicians will have allowed patients to die that they knew they could have saved
but for the commander’s decision.
Using the rule-utilitarian argument discussed
above, military physicians should have had no discretion to decide to do otherwise, although they
should always give their commanders necessary
medical information and their ethical views on what
they believe their commanders should do. Military
physicians should limit themselves in these contexts
to serving a role determined by their superiors, because their superiors have a wider view regarding
what is necessary to win the battle or war. As stated
previously, when military physicians subordinate
their own moral judgment in this manner, they are
adopting a military role-specific ethic. It is important to stress, however, that this does not relieve
the physician of the need to fully explain medical
consequences to commanders for the decisions they
are to make. Rather, it is to stress that once physicians have fully informed commanders of the medical aspects of the situation, these physicians must
step back and allow commanders to make the decision that they, as commanders, have been trained
and authorized to make. Physicians do not have the
ethical responsibility, or the legal right, to interfere
in the official chain of command unless it is a clear
case of an unethical or illegal order. The military
physician has, however, a moral responsibility to
make his or her views known. This moral obligation, though difficult to implement sometimes in
practice due to superiors not wanting to have their
view challenged, is unequivocal.
The core values supporting military physicians
treating soldiers in triage situations according to
their military role-specific ethic are the needs of the
military and the needs of larger numbers of soldiers.
This also serves some other important values. Chief
among these are two: (1) maintaining equity between soldiers, and (2) satisfying the military’s and
military physicians’ implicit promise to soldiers that
under certain circumstances the mission must take
priority over the needs of soldiers.
First, military physicians maintain equity between
soldiers who are not injured and in combat, soldiers
who are injured but can return to combat, and soldiers who are injured or ill and cannot return to
combat. That is, when military physicians treat soldiers so that they can return to duty, if these soldiers
do return to duty, they remain at risk of dying. Soldiers who have been injured or have become sick
to the extent that they may die but do not return to
combat remain at risk of dying, like soldiers who
remain in combat or have returned to duty. All three
groups, those already in combat, those returned to
combat, and those incapacitated and still in staging areas remain in harm’s way and thus at risk of
dying for their country. They will continue to be at
equal risk until they are removed from this “risk
pool.” This equity, in the sense of remaining at risk
of dying, is maintained, then, for the soldier who
may die in battle and for the soldier who is badly
injured and may die from not receiving antibiotics.
This same equity applies to soldiers with combat
fatigue, though their risk is less. Both groups are
similar in that they willingly undergo personal sacrifices because this is necessary for the military
mission or the greater good.
Second, the military and military physicians fulfill their implicit promise to soldiers to serve both
the military mission and soldiers at large above all
else. Military physicians have made an implicit
promise to all soldiers when soldiers join the military to sacrifice each of their individual medical
interests when necessary for the military mission
or the greater good. As stated before, soldiers are
willing to give their lives for the greater good of
protecting their country. Soldiers should, then, fully
expect military physicians to fulfill these promises
and, in fact, they may feel betrayed if military physicians do not.
The degree to which these approaches will remain ethically valid in the future is open to speculation. The success of combat may become much less
dependent on individual soldiers fighting on the
ground than it has been in the past. As the Persian
Gulf War and more recent United Nations’ actions
in Kosovo illustrate, air bombardment and air superiority may be much more important in the fuMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
342
ture. It is conceivable that at some point in time the
number of ground troops will no longer be a significant factor in combat. In that situation physicians might not be justified in adopting a military
role-specific ethic in triage situations.
Similarly, as a result of changing land war practices, the question arises as to whether military physicians will continue to be justified in treating combat fatigue in the manner they do now. The success
of the current practice of returning service members rapidly to combat depends largely on the
strength of the emotional bonding among soldiers
in the unit. Soldiers’ feelings of loyalty to those in
their unit and the emotional support they receive
from others in the unit after they return to it seem
to be decisive factors in their recovery. Whether or
not this is absolutely true cannot, of course, be empirically determined. Rather, it can only be deduced
from anecdotal information and observation. However, new systems that rotate soldiers in and out of
duty assignments, as occurred during the Vietnam
conflict, may impair the extent of this bonding and
thus the extent to which soldiers who experience
combat fatigue can return to duty and then function effectively.
Furthermore, due to new weaponry, in the future
soldiers may have to fight more independently from
one another or they may need to disperse rapidly
from one another on the battlefield. In either case,
units again would function in a more disjointed
manner, and the bonding among soldiers could
decrease. As a consequence, the capacity of impaired soldiers to rejoin their units after they experience combat fatigue and then to continue to fight
effectively may be reduced.
Even though military physicians’ capacity to return soldiers with combat fatigue to duty may decrease for this reason, the risk of their opening up
the floodgates to other soldiers developing combat
fatigue if they remove these soldiers from further
duty will remain. Military physicians still, therefore, ethically may be not only justified in giving
soldiers the expectation that they will return to combat but their military role-specific ethic may require
them to do so, in spite of a less beneficial psychiatric
outcome, so that the combat effort can be sustained.
Removing Unstable Soldiers From Combat
Military physicians have an absolute ethical obligation during warfare to insure that mentally unstable soldiers do not significantly endanger other
service members or the mission. Thus, unstable soldiers, or even those demonstrating the potential to
become unstable, must be removed from duty even
if they desire to continue to serve. 28 In relieving
them from further service, military physicians may
be ethically justified or, in fact, obligated, therefore,
to violate soldiers’ interests in a different way. That
is, when they give soldiers the expectation that they
will return to duty, they violate soldiers’ autonomy
by being implicitly manipulative or coercive. When
they remove soldiers from duty even when soldiers
may be capable of serving but this is uncertain,
military physicians violate their interests by not
giving them any option to remain on duty and possibly to spontaneously recover. The question of
whether military physicians should inform soldiers
beforehand of the conditions under which they will
remove them from duty involuntarily is inextricably connected to what military physicians should
do during combat.
Respecting soldiers’ autonomy fully in civilian
contexts may well require informing them before a
conflict arises of the conditions under which physicians would violate their autonomy. For instance,
civilian psychiatrists tell their patients prior to instituting a therapeutic relationship of the conditions
under which they would take action to hospitalize
them involuntarily. For example, civilian patients
are told that they may be hospitalized if they appear to be a danger to others or to themselves.
Military physicians as well could inform soldiers
who could be having emotional difficulty when
they first see them that they may use the information these soldiers disclose when interviewed to
remove them from duty. Soldiers so informed could,
however, use this forewarning to attempt to hide
from military physicians evidence of underlying
illness, such as not reporting delusions, hallucinations, or even other less serious symptoms such as
insomnia. Although military physicians’ withholding this forewarning is implicitly deceitful by omission, military physicians not only have justification
but are obligated to engage in this deceit because
these soldiers may markedly endanger their fellow
troops as a result of becoming unstable.
Counseling and Utilization of Irradiated Soldiers
The argument for military physicians telling soldiers the truth in regard to the supply of botulism
vaccine being limited can be contrasted with what
physicians should do after nuclear attack. As the
botulism vaccine example illustrates, the justification for military physicians engaging in truth telling may depend on the estimated consequences. As
stated, this may be an instance in which the customary priority of truth telling should no longer
prevail because it appears likely that soldiers will
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
343
respond so adversely to learning the truth that they
would be unable to continue to fight. This may be
especially true after soldiers have been exposed to
nuclear radiation. For instance, if soldiers were exposed to fatal doses of radiation after nuclear attack, it might take days before debilitating symptoms occur. If military physicians inform soldiers
that they have been fatally irradiated and will die,
they may refuse to fight or be so emotionally distraught that they are incapable of continuing to
fight. Alternatively, knowing that they will die anyway, they may be more willing to give their life for
their country in battle.
Their remaining for a short time in battle could
be critical to the military’s winning the war. The
enemy’s winning could have disastrous consequences, such as, again, Nazi Germany’s carrying
out further genocide should it have won World War
II. Consequently, military physicians lying to these
soldiers by withholding from them that they will
die could be warranted under these circumstances.
One way in which the ethical validity of this and
other claims can be assessed is to ask hypothetically
whether soldiers asked this in advance would agree.
Soldiers asked whether they would want this information withheld under these circumstances,
prior to this occurring, might indicate that this is
what they would want, because preventing such
catastrophic outcomes is the reason they agree to
fight in the first place.
This illustrates the critically important point I
made earlier, that soldiers and military physicians
share the priorities of both protecting large numbers of soldiers’ lives and winning the war. Soldiers
(both nonphysicians and physicians) voluntarily
place themselves in harm’s way and agree to place
the needs of the military above their own needs
when necessary, at least to some degree. They do
this because of their belief that the goal of protecting society has a higher priority than even their
lives. Military physicians serve to protect society
as well and their methods may involve placing the
military needs above their conventional obligations
to tell patients the truth and above the needs of their
patients. Thus, military physicians’ withholding the
truth in this and similar instances fulfills not only
these two ethical ends of furthering the likelihood
of military victory and the needs of larger numbers
of soldiers, but also military soldiers’ autonomous
choice and military physicians’ prior implicit promise to them.
Overview
The foregoing discussion involves the military
physician’s ethical obligations in regard to combat
fatigue, triage, and truth telling regarding limited
medical resources, or other situations. This discussion illustrates that although deontological values
(values based on duties as opposed to consequences) customarily are given highest priority in
civilian settings, they may warrant only secondary
status in military settings during combat because
of the exceptionally grave consequences to soldiers,
the greater society, and others at stake. In addition,
two deontological values may themselves conflict.
In all the above instances, there is a conflict between
military physicians’ prior promise or duty as physicians to individual soldiers and to their unit and
country. The latter may warrant priority. The values of respecting patients’ autonomy by being impartial when they present with combat fatigue, by
“warning them” when they may be mentally impaired, and by telling them truthfully when they
may lack adequate protection against biological or
chemical weaponry or have been fatally irradiated
may justifiably be subordinated to meet critical
military needs.
These examples represent one pole at the end of a
hypothetical continuum. At this end, at least arguably,
military needs should prevail because the consequences of not doing so are unthinkable. The national
security interest, and therefore the “military necessity,” is compelling. The requirement for military
physicians to adopt a military role-specific ethic in
which they cede all discretion to their military superiors and carry out actions even when they morally disagree is, however, not as compelling in some
other situations. These situations arise when the
national security interest, and therefore the military
necessity, is not of sufficient weight to require that
military physicians cede all discretion to their military superiors. The following section will examine
these situations of lesser military necessity in detail.
SITUATIONS INVOLVING DISCRETION
In these situations of lesser military necessity,
values given priority in civilian settings generally
warrant greater weight than military needs. As the
military needs become less critical, the greater the
justification becomes for military physicians to give
the same priority to patients’ interests as these patients would have in civilian settings.
There are several contexts, however, in which the
military’s needs remain predominant, but not absolute. Because they are not absolute, the optimal
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
344
outcomes overall might come from allowing military physicians to exercise some discretion. I shall
discuss several examples below. All these examples
occupy a place along the hypothetical continuum
between the extremes.
One extreme occurs when the national security
interest, and thus military necessity, is absolute, and
military demands are total, such as during active
combat. I have explored this situation in the preceding discussion of situations in which military
physicians should give total priority to their military role-specific ethic due to military needs and
thus exercise no discretion.
At the other extreme they should also generally
not exercise discretion but, rather, do what their
civilian colleagues would do. The example of this
given previously was military physicians respecting patients’ confidentiality as they would civilians’
confidentiality by not providing patients’ charts to
commanders seeking to use them to determine who
might be homosexual. In between these two extremes is this area in which physicians must weigh
choices and obligations to ensure the best treatment
possible for patients within the context of military
interests.
Balancing the Needs of the Military With
the Needs of Patients
Deciding when the needs of the military should
predominate is easy when positioned at the end of
the continuum in which soldiers face active combat, and life and death decisions must be made
quickly and definitively. Moving further to the
middle from that endpoint, however, one comes to
an area in which military necessity lessens, and the
issues are less obviously militarily driven. It is important to remember, however, that military readiness must always be maintained and therefore due
consideration must be given even in these instances
to not jeopardizing military readiness.
The three situations I will address to illustrate
this need for military physicians to shift from a
military role-specific ethic to one in which they can
and should exercise discretion are: (1) evaluating a
pilot suspected of being impaired, (2) evaluating a
commander who may be impaired, and (3) dealing
with issues regarding patients’ confidentiality. As
the military can be ordered to deploy within hours
of notification, there may still be a need to err on
the side of protecting the needs of the military over
the needs of the patient as the following discussions
will illustrate.
Evaluating Pilots Who May Be Impaired
A situation in which military physicians’ obligation to violate their patients’ confidentiality is
greater than any other obligation is when their patient is a pilot. 29 Pilots are singled out because the
damage that an impaired pilot, either military or
civilian, can do to others is substantial. There have
been a number of incidents in recent years in which
a pilot who was psychologically impaired has
crashed an aircraft. Those coming to mind in the
past decade include an Egyptian Air pilot who was
alleged to have intentionally put an airliner into a
fatal dive, a US Air Force pilot who broke off from
his filed flight plan and crashed into the side of a
mountain, and the pilot of a B-52 who was alleged
to have a reputation for doing “stunts” with his aircraft and whose plane crashed into the desert on a
training flight. There are many other instances that
could be cited. It is obvious, then, that the possibility of an impaired pilot putting others at risk is so
substantial that the interests of larger numbers of
soldiers or, especially during combat, of military
necessity must prevail. The military has established
specific guidelines for physicians to ground pilots,
which all pilots know. It follows, then, that there is
a decreased ethical argument that military physicians need to take initiative to warn pilots either to
treat them equitably or to avoid deceiving them. 30
In a specific situation, with a specific pilot, however, the gain to the military from a pilot’s being
grounded may be negligible and the harm to the
pilot significant. On this basis, the military physician
could be more justified in exercising discretion, but,
if there are such clear guidelines, the physician’s
doing so and violating these guidelines may put the
physician at some risk.
This concern regarding physicians’ own self-interest can be regarded in two ways. It may be that
physicians should never take risks of this kind for
their patients because among other reasons, such
as their own interest, this may impair their capacity to care for their patients optimally. Physicians
who make such sacrifices may experience fear of
adverse repercussions to themselves and then resent patients who have played a role in causing this
fear. This resentment may then interfere with their
giving the patient proper treatment and their relating to the patient with the unconditional regard and
warmth that would be necessary to establish an
optimal patient–physician relationship. I shall discuss the significance of military physicians establishing and maintaining this attitude of uncondiMixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
345
tional regard in more detail shortly.
According to the above view that military physicians could be justified in taking on no risks, physicians taking significant risks would not be morally required, because this standard would be too
high. Rather, to use the distinction posed by ethicists, such acts of self-sacrifice might be particularly
praiseworthy, or even heroic, but not morally
obligatory.
The other way of viewing military physicians’
self-interest is to regard this interest as only one
factor among others that should be taken into account when these physicians decide what to do.
From this perspective, the need for physicians taking on personal risks will be inevitable because
regulations cannot adequately take into account all
situations that may occur. Thus military physicians
may unavoidably take on personal risks if they ever
decide to exercise discretion by not reporting soldiers when regulations taken literally require them
to do so. This distinction applies to all cases in
which military physicians may be more justified in
exercising their discretion than in adopting a military role-specific ethic and exercising none.
Evaluating Impaired Commanders
Military physicians also may have to decide
whether to exercise discretion when they have patients with exceptional military authority who have
medical conditions that could interfere with their
capacity to exercise sound judgment. When this
occurs, military physicians have heightened obligations to the military and, indeed, the nation, because if these patients make poor decisions because
of their medical conditions, these decisions could
affect many soldiers’ lives and even the society at
large.
This concern is illustrated most clearly in regard
to the president or a senior military officer. If there
are indications that the leader’s cognitive capacities are impaired, military physicians may have an
obligation to serve the nation’s interests by reporting this disability. This same question may arise in
regard to patients with far less responsibility, as the
following case demonstrates:
Case Study 12-1: The Alcoholic General. A military
physician was treating the wife of a general after she had
become depressed following surgery for colon cancer. In
the course of his discussing her life situation with her,
she revealed that her husband was addicted to alcohol.
This general strongly influenced the formation of military
policies and had thousands of soldiers under his command. The patient was adamant, however, that she did
not want her physician to disclose to the military what
she had revealed to him in confidence. The physician
believed that legally he might be obligated to pass on this
information to command due to the interests of the military,
but he decided, nonetheless, to exercise his discretion by
respecting his patient’s confidentiality.
Comment: If the physician had reported that this general was addicted to alcohol, it could have helped him
medically as the military could have forced him to receive
treatment. It also could have ruined the general’s military
career and, due to the wife’s having disclosed this, the
couple’s marriage as well. In the physician’s opinion, this
action also would have had only marginal benefits on how
the general performed and possibly would have had adverse consequences for the military because soldiers
would lose trust in military physicians maintaining confidentiality. This physician’s decision to exercise discretion
would be supported, in addition, by another factor—the
physician’s implicit promise to the patient. The patient
presumably believed that the physician would keep her
communication confidential. The physician could have
warned her that he might not respect her confidentiality
before starting to see her, but he had not. If he had, this
might have adversely affected her ability to trust him. It
might have even precluded the success of the therapy. 31
His not having warned her when he could have makes
the case for respecting her confidentiality still stronger.
This example is paradigmatic of others that arise
regarding whether military physicians should
adopt a military role-specific ethic and routinely
violate patients’ confidentiality without warning
them or whether they should warn their patients
routinely that they would or may report them. 32
Whether or not to warn patients and whether or not
to violate patient confidentiality may best depend,
however, on the specifics of the situation or case,
as I shall now discuss.
Violating Patient Confidentiality
Again these cases should be considered as falling along a continuum. The argument that military
psychiatrists should violate patients’ confidentiality is stronger in some than in others. The following case is an example of a situation in which a
stronger argument can be made for military physicians not violating confidentiality, invariably, but
instead using discretion.
Case Study 12-2: Confidentiality and the Rape Victim.
A young woman came to a military psychiatrist to obtain
psychiatric counseling after alleging that she had been
raped. Because the alleged rapist was a soldier, his defense attorney requested the psychiatrist’s notes. The
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
346
psychiatrist had not informed the patient beforehand that
this could occur. The patient’s mother went into the
psychiatrist’s office, found his notes pertaining to her
daughter, and attempted to destroy them before the psychiatrist and others could restrain her. 33
Comment: Although the patient’s confidentiality was
violated, the national security issue was minimal in this
case. The military physician’s ethical obligation to protect the patient’s confidentiality in this instance is greater
because the physician’s violating it fails to serve the military mission. Current military law may still require that he
give the chart to the defense attorney, but if this is so this
is an instance where there may be discrepancy between
what is ethically optimal and what is presently military
law. Ethics is often “ahead of the law.” That is, the only
justification for depriving soldiers of “ethical rights” they
would have as civilians is needs of the military mission
related to combat or national security. When these needs
are absent, the justification for a different policy generally doesn’t exist. (Since the time this event occurred,
the rules have been changed to protect patient confidentiality to a greater extent. 34[§2]) As in the above case involving confidentiality this has begun to be recognized; it
also has been recognized recently in regard to service
persons having psychiatric illness. The requirements for
involuntary commitment and the use of psychotropic
agents over and against soldiers’ objections were once
quite discrepant for soldiers as opposed to civilians. Now,
they are much more similar. Bringing this principle fully
into law has, however, just begun.
Using Discretion When Treating Soldiers With
Marginal Problems
There are two arenas in which military physicians
should exercise discretion in the treatment of soldiers who have marginal problems. These are: (1)
when deciding whether or not to report soldiers
who have minimal substance abuse problems; and
(2) when treating soldiers with problems not related
to military performance. Although it may be comforting for physicians to always follow the “letter
of the law,” it is not always of benefit to their patients, nor is it always required.
Reporting Soldiers With Minimal Substance
Abuse Problems
In general, military physicians follow the same
priorities as civilian physicians when soldiers have
problems with alcohol and drug abuse. 35,36 For example, the Army prohibits commanders from prosecuting soldiers who enroll voluntarily in rehabilitation programs. 37 Their substance abuse problems
are also kept confidential unless doing this could
have highly significant adverse effects on others,
the military, or the nation.
Although these provisions might appear to relieve military physicians from ethical dilemmas in
regard to soldiers who have problems of substance
abuse, in reality they may not. Soldiers may fear
that if they enter substance abuse programs, they
will lose their potential for “fast-track” or optimally
rapid promotions, or that if the total number of service members is reduced (ie, through a reduction
in force or “RIF”), their substance abuse will be a
consideration working against their being retained.
(Some service members have the same fears,
whether valid or not, in regard to seeking psychotherapy from military psychiatrists.) Military physicians encountering soldiers whose findings barely
meet the criteria for referral to a rehabilitation program must decide, therefore, whether to follow a
military role-specific ethic (ie, “go by the book” and
report them) or to exercise discretion.
In this instance, physicians using no discretion
would report all, inflexibly. Physicians using discretion, however, further justice in the sense of fairness by treating service members individually on
the basis of what is best for the patient in light of
all relevant moral considerations, such as those that
I will discuss next.
Soldiers’ “failing” in rehabilitative programs may
be discharged from the military. Thus, the above
question regarding military physicians adopting a
military role-specific ethic or using discretion may
arise when soldiers have generally done well but
not met all criteria for successful rehabilitation. 36
Then, as when military physicians must decide
whether to refer service members to substance
abuse rehabilitation programs over their objection,
military physicians must decide whether to adopt
a military role-specific ethic or exercise discretion,
as represented in the case that follows.
Case Study 12-3: The Soldier and the Positive Urine
Test. A soldier who had served for over 19 years in the
military had only months to go until she retired. She had
completed a rehabilitation program but during a follow-up
visit showed a barely positive urine test for an antianxiety drug that she was not permitted to take. She admitted
she had taken this medication to alleviate a transient acute
episode of anxiety. Her psychiatrist had to decide whether
or not to report this episode, knowing that as a consequence this patient would be discharged from the military just prior to her retirement date and thus would lose
her right to retirement pay. The psychiatrist reported the
violation and the patient was discharged from the military
prior to reaching 20 years of service.
Comment: Most members of the rehabilitation staff
believed adamantly that this single, “marginal violation”
should have been ignored and they felt enraged. They
believed that because she was close to retirement and
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
347
had given more than 19 years of service to the military, it
was unjust to deprive her of the retirement benefits, which
she otherwise had earned, on the basis of her “erring” by
taking this medication to relieve her anxiety. The physician was, of course, following a military role-specific ethic.
The staff who objected wanted the physician, instead, to
use discretion. The discharge stood and the patient was
denied retirement pay.
Among the considerations affecting this and
similar cases, of course, is that if the physician does
not “go by the book” and report the soldier, the
physician, in principle and practice, would be committed to determining what criteria to use to decide every other case as well. This might violate the
ethical principle of consistency. That is, this principle requires that persons respond the same way
in similar cases unless there are morally relevant
features that distinguish one case from another and,
thus, warrant one case being treated in a different
way from another. Otherwise, the ethical decision
in each case is, at its core, arbitrary. Stated differently, if the military physician does not act consistently in these cases but exercises discretion in some,
but not in other cases, the physician enters a slippery slope. The physician has opened the door to
making decisions on a basis other than “the letter
of the law” and the task of fulfilling the requirement of equity or justice by treating like cases the
same will be harder. The physician may then make
these decisions subjectively without the physician
knowing or intending this. These decisions thus
would be arbitrary. The physician would, then, be
vulnerable if exercising discretion to deciding on
the basis of subjective factors. This would violate the
principle of equity. Thus, although the physician’s
not using discretion seems overly rigid and lacking
in compassion, the use of a military role-specific
ethic, even in this kind of case, furthers the ethical
principles of equity and consistency. I am proposing, however, that even though using the military
role-specific ethic achieves these values, in situations involving soldiers with marginal problems,
military physicians preferably should exercise discretion because the potential for harm to the military mission is absent or remote.
Treating Soldiers With Problems Not Related to
Military Performance
As previously suggested, military physicians face
a dilemma when taking a patient’s history. If they
ask about soldiers’ prior sexual experience or
whether they use an illegal drug, such as marijuana,
military physicians may believe that they have a
duty to inform these soldiers’ commanders to assess them for homosexual activity or to refer them
to substance abuse programs for formal evaluation,
respectively.
Yet, because the interest of the military is sufficiently small in such cases, it may be that in these
particular cases military physicians should act primarily to further the interests of these patients. At
the far end of this continuum, this could be called a
medical role-specific ethic, and the military physician should again not exercise independent discretion. This role is the opposite of the role-specific
ethic in which the physician follows military requirements without using discretion, as previously
considered.
What should the criteria be under which this
patient-centered ethic, as opposed to discretion,
should be applied? The general criteria I am suggesting here that military physicians may consider
as sufficient grounds for adopting the patient-centered or medical as opposed to military role-specific ethic are these two: (1) when the patient has a
clear medical interest, and (2) the military has virtually none. Consider, as examples, the following
two cases:
Case Study 12-4: The Affair. An active duty service
person asked by his physician how he was doing reported
that he was having an affair. The physician reported this
to the service person’s commander.
Comment: In this instance, both the patient and the
physician’s colleagues were upset with the physician for
reporting this “admission” to the commander. The colleagues believed that it was critical that they retain the
option to discuss such behaviors with patients confidentially. They believed that the bearing of this behavior on
the military mission was negligible, whereas their need
to discuss this issue with patients was extreme. This is
one instance where the need for military physicians to
follow a medical model may be, as it was in the eyes of
these other military physicians, absolute.
Case Study 12-5: Separation Anxiety Mistaken for
Alcoholism. A soldier was being medically discharged
and had made arrangements to begin a high-paying job
in a distant state. A few days prior to the completion of
his medical board and his leaving his wife to begin the
new job, this soldier became inebriated and tearfully expressed to his wife his fear of going away without her.
The wife called the husband’s internist asking what she
should do. The internist, in turn, called a military physician who had seen the patient during his prior hospitalization. The physician decided to put a hold on the medical board and to send the patient to the substance abuse
program for evaluation because he believed this patient’s
behavior possibly reflected a previously unidentified problem with alcohol. He also believed that he was required
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
348
by his military role-specific ethic to support the military’s
interest by reporting any illness that could have possibly
contributed to the medical problem for which the patient
was being retired from the service. After explaining what
had happened in detail to his new employers and postponing his beginning his new job so that the military could
thoroughly evaluate his alcohol use, the patient was found
to not have a problem with alcohol, went to his new job,
and subsequently was joined by his wife.
Comment: The physician’s requiring the patient to be
evaluated could have jeopardized his new employment
opportunity even though he had no problem with alcohol.
As it was, it caused this soldier substantial difficulties.
The military physician had a number of options available.
First, he might have furthered the patient’s interest more
by calling the patient in for consultation and evaluating
him as he would have had the patient been a civilian.
Instead, this physician adopted a military role-specific
ethic. There is, then, this argument for his exercising discretion. Otherwise, the concept of the military mission or
military necessity can be used in a literally infinitely elastic way. All the choices of military physicians could be
made on the basis of a military role-specific ethic and
justified on the grounds that no matter how indirect or
remote they fulfill “the mission.”
Counseling Soldiers With HIV Who Endanger
Third Parties
Soldiers with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) may endanger other persons. 38 Some of these
soldiers are homosexual; others acquire HIV infection by other means, such as intravenous drug use
or transfusions. All such soldiers are subject to limitations regarding their overseas deployment. 39
An ethical issue military physicians often confront has to do with protecting third parties. 40,41 Two
situations are illustrative: (1) soldiers who have not
informed a sexual partner that they have HIV, and
(2) soldiers who pose a danger because they may
engage in unprotected sex with others. These situations differ in many respects but one that is particularly important is that in the latter situation the
identity of the persons endangered cannot be identified because these liaisons have not yet occurred.
Protecting Identified Third Parties
The more common of the two situations is when
soldiers with HIV infection are unwilling to inform
their spouse or sexual partner that they are infected.
States vary greatly in their laws regarding what civilian physicians should do in this situation. In
some states physicians must protect patients’ confidentiality; in other states they must initiate contact
tracing. In some states they are legally protected
whatever they do; in other states they can be sued
regardless of what they do.
The questions originally posed for the military
when HIV and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) were first identified were what policy
the military should have and whether it should differ because of exigencies unique to the military. In
1987 the military adopted its own policy that requires military physicians to take action to inform
contacts who are on active duty or are beneficiaries
of military medical care so long as soldiers identify
them specifically as contacts. 42
This policy leaves several ethical questions unanswered. Suppose, for instance, a soldier with HIV
has an ongoing relationship with a partner in the
military, but is unwilling to tell that partner that he
is infected. If asked about partners, the soldier could
deny that he had a partner and state that he acquired the infection from a prostitute or a person
whose name he does not know because it was a “one
night stand.” The military physician could attempt
to trick the soldier into sharing the identity of his
partner by allowing the soldier to believe that this
information would be kept confidential. However,
this would destroy the physician’s ability to work
with that patient.
To respect such soldiers’ autonomy, it would be
necessary to inform them beforehand that if they
identify their partners but will not inform them
themselves, the military physician will take action
to try to insure that the partner is informed. With
this warning, however, these soldiers may deny the
existence of these partners or not give their identities. This may cause innocent third parties to risk
becoming infected with HIV, or if they are already
infected, to not be informed, and thus not receive
treatment.
Notwithstanding this obvious harm, there are
strong, though less obvious, arguments for warning such soldiers. Military physicians giving this
warning, and therefore allowing these soldiers to
choose whether or not to reveal the identity of their
partners, might paradoxically enhance their likelihood of being able to persuade the soldier over time
to inform the partner or at least to divulge the
partner’s identity. Legal requirements do not preclude their giving this warning, though they may
be seen as implying that these physicians should
not warn them. Giving priority to maintaining an
optimal therapeutic relationship with such soldiers
may maximally benefit not only third parties but
also these soldiers themselves. That is, over time
they may be able to persuade these soldiers to tell
their partners themselves. This may be better for
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
349
these soldiers because they may be better able to
“live with themselves” over the long run. By exercising discretion in this case, then, it is possible that
third parties will receive important, even lifesaving, information while the patient–physician relationship is preserved.
This same outcome would be brought about even
under military law if the partner were not on active duty and not a recipient of military medical
care. This is because even if a soldier identifies the
partner, the military has no requirement to inform
him or her. Military physicians still might be required to warn such partners, however, if this were
required by state law. Military physicians’ legal
obligations may vary depending on the laws of the
state within which they practice, but when state law
should apply is often controversial.
But what if military physicians learn partners’
identities without routinely warning soldiers with
HIV that they will inform partners of their HIV status? Should military physicians exercise discretion
in this situation or should they adopt a military rolespecific ethic and inform partners? Military physicians have made an implied general promise to all
soldiers to act in the interests of greater numbers of
soldiers as opposed to those of their individual patients when the two conflict. This promise carries
overriding moral weight for the reasons previously
discussed when military physicians perform triage
or treat soldiers with combat fatigue during battle.
Informing third parties may protect them, but it is
empirically open to question whether this approach
will benefit most soldiers in the long run. Should
this obligation to act in the interests of greater numbers of soldiers apply in a context like this where
military combat interests are negligible? If it should
apply, to what extent? This question is as open to
military physicians deciding either way as any ethical question.
Protecting Unidentified Third Parties
In 1988, the Department of Defense issued a directive designed to protect third parties still further. 43
It established that active duty service members who
have HIV infection and have been counseled regarding the risk they pose to others must practice
protected sex or face criminal or administrative repercussions.
This directive may go as far as any regulation
could go to protect third parties from patients with
HIV who have no exceptional emotional problems,
and thus can be significantly deterred by the threat
of punishment. It may be of little help, however,
when patients with HIV have emotional problems
such as severe depression or psychosis. This is especially the case if there is loss of impulse control
that may be associated with the course of these psychiatric disorders. In these situations they may “act
out” and there may be little that regulations can do
to deter this behavior.
What should military physicians do in the case
of a patient with HIV who also has a psychiatric
disorder? Suppose, for example, a service member
with HIV comes to a military physician to receive
treatment for a recently acquired and painful venereal infection. Military physicians could follow a
military role-specific ethic and automatically refer
such a patient for criminal or administrative proceedings. Or they could use their discretion and
admit soldiers whom they believe may have impaired impulse control (because of underlying mental illness) to the ward for evaluation. If, for example, they believe a soldier is depressed and has
decreased impulse control for this reason, they may
admit him for depression as opposed to referring
him for administrative or criminal proceedings.
This problem is faced by military physicians’ civilian counterparts who also must decide what, if
anything, they can and should do when patients
with HIV pose a threat to other persons. A factual
difference is that military physicians have an obligation in the military to serve greater numbers of
soldiers over individual patients. They have also
made a prior implicit promise to protect all soldiers
to the extent that they can. Ethically, military physicians in this situation may also have more discretion and, indeed, justification for confining such
soldiers. In such a situation the soldier could be
confined to the ward for treatment for depression,
at least for a short while, because a medical discharge
from the military may be possible or necessary.
Generally, military physicians can psychiatrically
hospitalize soldiers against their will when they
pose a danger to themselves or others. (Civilian
physicians can, of course, do this as well, though
the extent to which it is likely they are “dangerous”
varies according to state law.) By doing this, they
could protect others and, hopefully, benefit soldiers
who temporarily endanger others because they
have illnesses such as depression, perhaps brought
on by their acquiring HIV. Furthermore, if such soldiers are hospitalized, they can be treated, instead
of having criminal proceedings initiated against
them. In this instance, because extremely large numbers of soldiers are not endangered, military physicians would not have an absolute obligation to
adopt a role-specific ethic by reporting these solMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
350
diers and exercising no discretion. Rather, they
would be justified in exercising their discretion by
confining some of these soldiers to the ward so that
unknown soldiers at risk of being infected by them
could be protected and so that these soldiers with
HIV could maximally benefit. In taking this course,
which would most benefit these patients, they
would be following the principle of placing these
patients’ interests first, which is, of course, the core
moral value of civilian physicians.
Meeting the Clinical Needs of Soldiers With
Psychological Disorders
Due to recent legal enactments44–46 soldiers generally have rights comparable to those of civilian
patients when facing involuntary commitment for
mental illness. Nonetheless, military physicians still
may have greater capacity to hospitalize such patients and to take certain preventive measures, because soldiers may have exceptional access to dangerous weaponry. For example, military physicians
can take initiatives to remove this weaponry when
soldiers are a danger to themselves. In this instance,
military physicians might be justified in doing more
than civilian physicians could do, not on the basis
of the military’s need but rather on the basis of their
patients’ needs. In such a situation they would be
acting on an absolute medical role-specific ethic but
taking this one step further. They would act to take
away these soldiers’ weapons to further benefit
these soldiers, though they might not be able to do
this if these patients were civilians.
In other instances, however, they might give less
optimal care than they otherwise would, to meet
soldiers’ best “medical interests.” For instance, what
should military physicians write in soldiers’ medical charts? In the past, for example, many military
psychiatrists who saw soldiers who were homosexual relied on writing euphemisms in the chart,
such as stating that patients who were homosexual
had “psychosexual confusion.” They believed that
investigators viewing these records would not understand their meaning, though other physicians
would. They also believed that investigators would
not be able to use these statements against these
soldiers’ interests.
Investigators used these records, however, to
confront soldiers whom they suspected were homosexual. Oftentimes these soldiers acknowledged,
under the duress of these “interrogations,” that they
were homosexual and were then discharged from
the service. Over recent decades there have been
more strict regulations47–49 and greater intolerance
of these approaches. This has resulted in the privacy of service members’ medical records being
better protected; military hospital authorities can
refuse to release records unless ordered to do so.
There is, however, another option available to military physicians. They can follow an absolute medical role-specific ethic by being more vague in their
chart notes, thus avoiding any entries that could
imply homosexual behavior (or, for that matter,
adultery). By so doing they can better protect their
patients from military prosecution for homosexual
conduct or adultery, both of which remain violations of military law.
Counseling and Treating Suicidal Soldiers
As with any individual expressing a desire to
commit suicide, the physician must evaluate how
genuine that expression may be in order to appropriately counsel and treat such a patient. In the
military the situation can be somewhat more complicated than in a civilian setting inasmuch as soldiers may feign suicidal thoughts and feelings in
an effort to be administratively discharged. 50–54 The
military physician, attempting to further military
ends by not opening up “the floodgates” to other
soldiers seeking this same “exit route,” may err in
either of two ways. In the first of these, the physician may deny that the suicidal intent is genuine.
As a result, such patients may kill themselves,
though military physicians could have prevented
this by taking other approaches.
Alternatively, they may agree that the suicidal
intent is genuine. In this case, the appropriate response would be to give the patient a trial of temporary limited duty, during which they provide the
patient psychotropic medication and short-term
psychotherapy. The goal of this approach is to determine whether the military environment is the
source of distress in such patients. If that is the case,
and they could do well if discharged from the military, they may be harmed also by remaining in the
military and taking medications they do not otherwise need. As a result of taking these medications,
they may suffer long-term negative effects. Furthermore, they may attempt suicide and die as a result
of not having been removed immediately from the
source of their stress.
Because these patients may be genuinely suicidal
or harmed substantially by any treatment other than
immediate discharge from the military, military
physicians’ medical obligation to such patients may
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
351
warrant having highest priority. However, military
physicians adopting a patient-centered ethic in
cases such as this may be possible only if military
policy changes. This may involve permitting soldiers who request discharge to be discharged after
a briefer waiting period, or discharged on request.
This policy may not have significant adverse effects
on the military if there are more persons who want
to join the military than there are spaces. If this were
the case, this would be another instance in which
ethics might be ahead of the law (ie, military physicians could be allowed to discharge suicidal patients immediately during basic and advanced individual training periods as opposed to taking an
increased risk that they could kill themselves by
keeping them on active duty).
Counseling and Treating Soldiers With Eating
Disorders
Military physicians also face conflicts in regard
to treating their patients optimally when their patients are mentally ill and likely to respond to treatment but military policies make this difficult. An
example is when persons in the military academies
demonstrate eating disorders while they are in the
academies. Students diagnosed with these disorders
may be excluded from further military service.
Moreover, if they had these problems prior to joining the military, and concealed that fact on entry,
they may be subject to prosecution for fraud. 55 As a
consequence, students having these disorders may
choose not to come for treatment. Military physicians may overcome this reluctance by engaging in
deceit and treating these students for “adjustment
disorders” and not reporting or recording in their
charts any symptoms they encountered prior to
entering the military.
Whether military physicians should “game the
system” in this manner is open to question, but what
is clear is that they cannot both treat these patients
successfully, which is their primary role, and, at the
same time, serve an investigatory function. The conflicting obligations these military physicians face
are like those physicians face when conducting epidemiological studies on soldiers with HIV or research on soldiers with possible problems of substance abuse. They cannot both do this research and
at the same time report service persons for violations such as engaging in homosexual acts or using
illegal drugs. Doing this research and reporting
these soldiers should be mutually exclusive actions.
Ultimately all these conflicts can be resolved only
by changing the military policies. As a result of military physicians’ efforts in regard to soldiers with
eating disorders at the service academies, policies
now make it easier for students in this situation to
receive treatment. 56
Prioritizing the Needs of Patients Over the
Needs of the Military
The needs of the military are relatively apparent
at first blush: The military needs to be ready to deploy as a force capable of accomplishing the mission it is given. However, the needs of the military
are not necessarily always supreme over those of
the patient. Thus there can be a need to prioritize
the individual’s needs against those of the organization. There are three arenas in which this is most
needed: (1) deciding what to do with prejudicial
information that is acquired during medical research; (2) evaluating homosexual soldiers who
have security clearances; and (3) meeting the medical needs of homosexual soldiers. Each of these will
be discussed in some detail.
Acquiring Prejudicial Information While
Conducting Medical Research
This same kind of conflict arises, as I just indicated, when military physicians wish to conduct
certain kinds of research. For example, research may
be carried out to determine what medical factors
result in soldiers being relieved from duty in overseas assignments. This information, like epidemiological data regarding HIV, could help the military
by suggesting interventions that could enhance soldiers’ capacity to continue to serve in these settings
effectively without having to be relieved.
Military physicians, however, have a general
obligation to report soldiers who have problems
with alcohol or drugs. The military rationale for this
requirement is that improper use of these substances could impair soldiers’ capacity to be effective. The military has not established an exception
that would allow military physicians to not have
this reporting requirement when they conduct research. By reporting these soldiers, military physicians could help these soldiers obtain treatment;
however, they implicitly deceive them if they conduct research without informing these soldiers that
they might report them for any illegal activities the
researchers discover in the course of the research.
If military physicians are not deceptive but fully
warn soldiers of their reporting requirement, they
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
352
could tell them the truth but then they would probably not acquire meaningful data. If the military
established an exception such that military physicians were permitted to keep this information confidential, they would be able both to avoid deceiving these soldiers and to obtain these data. However, as I shall indicate shortly, there may be good
reasons that the military shouldn’t establish such
an exception.
When military physicians report soldiers who
have problems with substance abuse, it may not be
as likely to save large numbers of soldiers’ lives or
to be critical to the success of a combat effort. This
is a situation in which military physicians would
therefore have greater moral justification in exercising discretion to not report this behavior. They
could also use discretion if before they ask soldiers
about their use of these substances, they would divulge to them that they would have to report any
affirmative answers.
Research regulations now require military physicians to inform these soldiers in general terms that
researchers cannot guarantee confidentiality and
that they face possible risks by becoming a subject
in the research. This requirement is based on the
need for such disclosure when obtaining informed
consent, as first enunciated in the Nuremberg Code.
Unless the institutional review boards that review
this research for its ethical acceptability require researchers to inform subjects more specifically how
their divulging misuse of alcohol or drugs will affect them, however, researchers do not have to do
so. Whether military physicians or others giving
subjects this information initially should give this
specific information is now left to their discretion.
Some soldiers who misuse alcohol and drugs will
discern on their own that the risks of their disclosing self-incriminating information exist. Others,
however, will not. An additional value therefore
that should affect military physicians’ decision
making in these situations is equity. Only by taking initiative to insure that all soldiers understand
the full ramifications of their making self-incriminating disclosures can they insure that all soldiers
know this. Only this can insure equity.
If military physicians do not take this initiative,
there is an additional, more subtle harm also
brought about. The soldiers who suffer the effects
of incriminating themselves are not on a par with
those soldiers savvy enough to discern on their own
that they face these risks. Thus, these less savvy
soldiers are worse off in this respect than those who,
due to being more savvy, can avoid the risk of incriminating themselves. Thus, military physicians
not giving this warning would not only violate equity; it would discriminate against those less capable of protecting themselves in this situation.
Evaluating Homosexual Soldiers Who Have
Security Clearances
When soldiers have access to classified information they could divulge military secrets, in which
case the nation’s security may be compromised. 57 If
national security is truly at stake, military physicians have greater justification in giving priority to
national interests even when this would violate
patients’ interests. However, if protecting military
secrets isn’t necessary for national security concerns, the justification is greater for military physicians to give patients’ interests priority by exercising some discretion.
This discretion would involve the physician making an independent assessment of such factors as
the magnitude of risk to the military and its likelihood, and weighing these factors against the magnitude and likelihood of harm to the patient. An
example in which military physicians had to decide
whether to use discretion occurred when HIV infection first emerged among soldiers. 58 Military
physicians had to choose whether to protect the
military from unlikely risks to security or to protect these soldiers from certain harm to themselves.
To understand how this occurred, it is necessary
to understand that historically homosexual soldiers
have been excluded from the military on two rationales: (1) they were considered a security risk,
and (2) they were viewed as potentially disruptive
to troop morale. 59,60 The former rationale was based
on the presumption that soldiers who were homosexual were exceptionally vulnerable to extortion.
This presumption overlooks the fact that soldiers
who are heterosexual and commit adultery may be
at equal or greater risk of extortion. There has also
been the concern in the US military that the presence of homosexuals in a unit could be disruptive
to unit morale. This is perhaps the only possibly
sound reason that engaging in homosexual acts remains an illegal activity under the Uniform Code
of Military Justice (UCMJ). 61 (See Chapter 6, Honor,
Combat Ethics, and Military Culture, for a further
discussion of this topic.) Ultimately, this question
is, of course, empirical. Persons with homosexual
preferences have served effectively in militaries
throughout history. Whether this present policy is
empirically valid, or rather reflects bias, is therefore in doubt.
After HIV emerged, the need arose for the miliMixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
353
tary to ascertain, to the degree possible, both the
true prevalence of HIV infection among soldiers and
its etiology. These findings were considered necessary to determine what policies should be adopted
in the military to limit the number of soldiers with
HIV, both entering the military and acquiring it once
they have joined.
A difficult ethical question arose in regard to soldiers who had HIV and were homosexual. On one
hand, it was felt that if these soldiers acknowledged
that they were homosexual, military researchers
should adopt a military role-specific ethic, exercise
no discretion, and report these soldiers’ homosexuality to their commanders. Homosexual behavior
was, after all, against military law and posed a risk,
so it was believed, to national security and troop
morale. These researchers could, on the other hand,
have warned soldiers what would happen to them
if they divulged that they were homosexual. This
would, of course, have protected them from making unwanted disclosures resulting in adverse repercussions.
In 1985, to facilitate accurate epidemiological
studies regarding HIV and AIDS, Secretary of Defense Weinberger granted immunity to soldiers with
HIV if they disclosed that they were homosexual
during epidemiological assessment. However, they
could still be administratively discharged if knowledge of their homosexuality was obtained independently. 62 In 1986, Congress gave these soldiers greater
protection by passing legislation that protected soldiers with HIV from involuntary separation and
other actions adverse to their interests63 if they acknowledged during epidemiological assessment
that they were homosexual. However, denial or revocation of soldiers’ security clearance and access
to classified information was not categorized as an
adverse action. Consequently, soldiers who divulged
that they were homosexual during epidemiological studies risked undergoing these repercussions.
Controversy arose over whether soldiers with
HIV having security clearances should be protected
from these repercussions. 64 If military researchers
sought out this information and then reported it,
they would harm these patients. Military researchers had another option, not precluded by military
law. During epidemiological assessment, they could
tell these soldiers what the potential consequences
could be prior to asking them if they were homosexual. Whether or not these soldiers would then
take this option of acknowledging that they were
homosexual was left to their discretion. If military
researchers gave priority to the military’s security
interest, they would, of course, not inform these
soldiers that if they acknowledged that they were
homosexual, they could lose their security clearance. If they informed them of this possibility, they
would protect them from this harm, but, at the same
time, invalidate their epidemiological assessment. 65,66
In this instance the risk of harm to the military if
military physicians did not report these soldiers’
homosexuality was uncertain but the risk of harm
to these patients significant and certain. On these
grounds, military physicians had reasonable ethical justification for exercising discretion. Consequently, military physicians’ optimal ethical response
could differ qualitatively in this instance from the
responses during combat previously considered. As
opposed to adopting an absolute military role-specific ethic, they may have been justified in using
discretion or, even, perhaps in adopting an absolute
medical role-specific ethic. If military physicians
exercised no discretion and acted strictly according to a military role-specific ethic, as they should
in the prior combat situations, they would not only
implicitly deceive these soldiers by omission; they
would entrap them.
Meeting the Medical Needs of Homosexual
Soldiers
Military physicians’ obligations when they see
pilots also stand in sharp contrast to their obligations when they see soldiers who are homosexual
but, unlike those previously considered, do not have
HIV. If this situation involving pilots lies at one end
of a continuum at which military physicians may
be rightly regarded as being morally justified in
exercising little or no discretion, situations involving homosexual soldiers who do not have HIV lie
at the other.
As already discussed in some detail, homosexual
conduct has been and continues to be unlawful in
the military. The circumstances that require military physicians to report soldiers when they imply
that they are homosexual remain controversial. 67,68
Some physicians assert that even if soldiers strongly
imply that they are gay, this is not direct evidence
that they engage in homosexual conduct. Accordingly, military physicians may say to such individuals at this time, “On the basis of what you have told
me, you may or may not be currently engaging in
sexual conduct with persons of the same sex. If you
tell me more, I may have to report you.”
Other military physicians see this as collusion
with these patients to undermine military law.
However, if these or any soldiers even only could
have uncertainty regarding military physicians’ leMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
354
gal requirements, a “warning” ethically may be justifiable, if not mandatory, to respect such soldiers’
autonomy to a degree minimally necessary. Still
other military physicians believe that they have an
obligation to follow up to see if soldiers who give
any information suggesting that they are currently
engaging in homosexual relationships are, in fact,
doing so. This may include their asking soldiers to
elaborate on answers they have given on psychological testing. An MMPI (Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory) is such a test. It is usually
carried out to help healthcare professionals provide
better clinical care, but can be used to suggest the
possibility of homosexual conduct.
As this last example involving homosexuality
best illustrates, to respect soldiers’ autonomy military physicians must sometimes tell soldiers prior
to their divulging potentially incriminating information what physicians will do with this information. In the case of military physicians who would
follow up patients’ responses on the MMPI, this
would require them to inform these soldiers prior
to their taking this test that this is what they would
do. The “price” of military physicians respecting
soldiers’ autonomy in this manner is that soldiers
they so inform will be less likely to disclose selfincriminating information on this test, making it
less clinically useful. In this case, their either giving this warning or not using the test for this covert “military purpose” would represent their
adopting an absolute medical role-specific ethic.
There are several considerations that favor military physicians giving warnings if they would report soldiers in these situations. First, and of far
greatest importance, is that soldiers most likely
would divulge such self-incriminating information
only because, like the wife of the general, they believed it would be kept in confidence. Military physicians then using this information against these
patients’ best interests would exploit these patients’
trust. They would use their professional role as
physicians to exploit these patients’ vulnerability
for the military’s ends. This is particularly problematic when military physicians have the opportunity
to avoid this situation by warning patients but
choose not to do so.
Military physicians have, of course, made promises, explicit and implicit, to the military as well.
The ethical problem arises because even though
military physicians and their soldier-patients know
this, in some cases, these promises conflict with
other values and in other cases it is unclear for soldier-patients how they would apply or soldier-patients have never learned that these military physicians’ promises to the military exist.
In all these cases the ethical assumption is that
military physicians should take the initiative to insure that the soldier-patient knows both that their
promise to the military exists and how it applies.
The key questions again are when, if ever, this
should not be the case, and if so why? When this
promise and its application have been made clear
beforehand, military physicians’ following through
on their prior promises to the military is essentially
unproblematic.
Second, as stated, military physicians’ reporting
soldiers without providing warnings discriminates
between soldiers who err by being trusting and
those who do not. This violates the principle of equity and is particularly morally problematic because
those suffering adverse consequences would be soldiers who gave information honestly in the hope
that this would help them. Thus, they would end
up being “punished” for doing precisely what physicians ask, expect, and hope their patients will do.
Further, this is what the military wants and expects
them to do.
Military physicians can give their commanders
good advice only if soldiers are honest with them.
That is, the military simply cannot “have it both
ways.” They cannot have military physicians both not
warn soldier-patients and then “turn them in” and
at the same time have military physicians able to
maximize soldier-patients’ interests to obtain the
most accurate information from them. If military
physicians violate the soldier-patient’s trust, it can
be expected that this will have a “chilling” effect,
diminishing his capacity to trust military physicians. Thus, patients would not give military physicians the accurate information regarding their
health that commanders need. The military, knowing this, does not expect military physicians to serve
those two mutually exclusive roles, investigator and
military physician, simultaneously. Thus, they have
not prosecuted or taken administrative action
against military physicians for not reporting, although
they could.
And third, the goals of the military would be
undermined by requiring military physicians to
report all such patients. In regard to homosexual
soldiers, for example, the military would want to
eliminate soldiers from serving who show inadequate discretion because the result of this behavior could adversely affect the unit. However, this is
also true of soldiers who are heterosexual and engage in sexual harassment. The tasks the military
primarily wants its physicians to perform are to
maintain the health of the troops and to inform
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
355
commanders accurately regarding the troops’ health
status. Military physicians violating soldiers’ confidentiality by reporting them may diminish these
physicians’ ability to maintain the unit’s health and
to obtain accurate information regarding it because
soldiers might not come for treatment or might be
less honest if physicians violated their confidentiality. This was the concern of the military physicians
(in Case Study 12-4) when their colleague reported
the service member for adultery.
This may be a reason the military has chosen not
to attempt to identify and punish military physicians who have not reported soldiers whom they
know or strongly suspect have engaged in homosexual behavior. In fact, it may be optimal for the
military to have strict regulations against homosexual conduct but to be lax in enforcing them. This
logically contradictory reality may exist in many
other contexts as well. For example, it may be optimal to have speed limits for traffic but to have police not enforce these limits when drivers only
slightly exceed them.
Traffic officers must decide what to do when a
car passes at 56 miles-per-hour in a 55 miles-perhour zone. It would be possible for them to give all
such speeders a ticket. They do not. Rather they use
their discretion and give a ticket under these conditions only rarely, if at all. Why, then, do traffic
officers not ticket such persons every time? Understanding the rationale behind their not ticketing
every driver going 56 miles-per-hour is essential to
understanding why military physicians must sometimes exercise discretion, as well. It is this: Having
this law serves a major goal—it deters drivers from
going too fast. It also, of course, provides a means
by which particularly dangerous drivers can be
stopped.
Not reinforcing this speed limit every time serves
another, and more important, end than their ticketing all these drivers. It frees up their time so that
they can do much more important tasks. If either
goal alone were maximized, this would be at the
expense of the other. The best means of furthering
both these goals maximally, without significantly
having to sacrifice either one, therefore, is to have
a policy and practice that are in one sense contradictory: Having a strict law but, purposely, choosing sometimes to not enforce it.
As this example suggests, the military, despite
having strict laws, sometimes allows and even intends for military physicians to exercise discretion.
The military may intend that there is this “contradiction” between military policy and practice when it,
and it alone, will enable the military to further maximally two mutually exclusive, important ends. In
this example, strict laws prohibiting homosexual behavior deter persons who engage in homosexual
behavior from entering the military, and, if they do,
after they enter the military, from engaging in it in
a manner that is blatant or indiscreet.
Allowing military physicians to not report this
behavior enables military physicians to better fulfill their two most important goals. If military doctors do not report these soldiers, the likelihood is
greater that these patients—and, indeed, others who
do not engage in homosexual behavior—will trust
military physicians. Trusting them more, they
should more readily come to them for treatment.
Only if they do can military physicians more maximally fulfill these two goals: Maintaining their
units’ health by treating soldiers and acquiring the
most accurate information possible regarding the
unit’s health. In doing this, they give up, of course,
their role as additional investigators who can identify and report criminal conduct. This is, however,
the primary responsibility of others.
Overview
It should be noted that in all of the examples in
this section, there is theoretically a military rolespecific ethic to which military physicians could
comply without exception. Invariably, for example,
homosexual soldiers could be reported and discharged; soldiers having problems with substance
abuse, referred to rehabilitation programs; pilots,
grounded; and soldiers with HIV who engage in
unsafe sex, put in jail. The military must maintain
these options because highly problematic cases will
occur and the military must be able to deal with
these situations in a manner that allows them under extenuating circumstances to maximally protect large numbers of soldiers and thereby the military mission. This may require military physicians
to have conflicting administrative duties that may
result in their having to choose to betray their moral
obligations to their patients as physicians. This is
necessary because of the heightened military concerns that are at stake.
This problem unavoidably arises because the
policies allowing the military these special options
are broad but not all soldiers will represent the kind
or degree of threat these policies are intended to
prevent or remove. The only way, then, to obtain
the maximal benefit for both the military and these
soldiers is for strict policies to exist but for military
physicians to be free to exercise their discretion in
ways such as those exemplified.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
356
THE EMOTIONAL EFFECT OF ROLE CONFLICT
of these needs must, of course, be valid. This, then, is
a secondary purpose of this and the other chapters in
these two volumes on military medical ethics. That
is, I hope this analysis will provide the most ethically
valid arguments and criteria now available for military physicians to know when they must decide
whether to follow their military role-specific ethic and
when not to. With this knowledge, they can act with
a clear conscience as opposed to moral angst, and, as
a result, they, their patients, and presumably the military will be better off. In this regard they are like all
military personnel who must at times make extraordinarily difficult decisions in a matter of moments,
then live with the consequences for the rest of their
lives. If they have a clear sense of why their actions
were absolutely necessary, as established by ethically
valid criteria, they can live with their deeds. The following case, although not that of a physician, clearly
demonstrates the need for, and the value of, their
knowing beforehand such ethically valid criteria.
Case Study 12-6: The Surviving Submariner. During World War II one of the most harrowing duties was that
of a submariner. Survival of the ship, and thus its crew,
depended upon everyone acting as part of a team, doing
what was necessary for the benefit of the group, and
oftentimes doing these things without hesitation. In one case
in particular, a member of the crew had gone out on the
deck of the surfaced submarine to retrieve an object he
had left there. Just then word came that the submarine was
about to be hit by a torpedo and thus it immediately had to
dive. A sailor inside knew he had no choice but to shut the
latch, leaving the sailor outside to drown, or else he would
endanger the entire crew. He shut the latch.
Comment: Decades later the sailor who shut the latch
still found that certain experiences triggered this excruciating memory. However, because he knew he had no
choice if he was to save his fellow crew members’ lives,
he was able to cope with this memory.
In a similar manner, military physicians being
aware of why they must in some cases follow a military role-specific ethic even when this harms individual soldiers perhaps may feel substantial relief
from the pain they otherwise might feel both at that
time and thereafter. Like the “surviving submariner” facing two horrific alternatives, they can gain
relief from knowing they did the “least worst” they
could have done.
Earlier in the chapter I mentioned the emotional
effect of military physicians’ knowing that they are
allowing increased risks of their patients being unnecessarily harmed. This chapter has reviewed the
many ways in which this might occur, ranging from
treating soldiers so that their commanders can send
them back to combat, to giving soldiers unproven
pharmaceuticals, and even manipulating soldiers to
try psychotherapy when they are threatening suicide.
The emotional effect of military physicians choosing
to meet the military’s interests when they face these
mixed agency issues may be substantial. These healthcare professionals may unconsciously make this less
painful over time by cognitively denying the real or
potential harm that may affect these service members.
If they do this, however, they may offer less to these
soldiers because they have become more insensitive
to their own and these patients’ emotional pain. As a
result they may offer less to the military as well.
Military physicians forced as a result of military
exigencies to act in ways that they know may harm
patients or even cause their death cannot help but
experience this cognitive and, thus, emotional dissonance and moral angst. This dissonance and angst,
for example, may occur when military physicians insist that soldiers alleging to be suicidal stay in the
military longer as opposed to their serving as their
advocates by requesting their immediate release. To
relieve their cognitive dissonance, their minds may
automatically inflate the rationale for resisting immediate release and deflate the rationales for requesting
it. These physicians’ empathy for these soldiers may
decrease such that a hardening occurs within them
towards not only these soldiers but all other patients,
as well. This hardening may lessen the military physician, as both a physician and a person.
This effect may be mitigated if military physicians understand as well as possible the rationales
for the military role-specific ethic having to prevail
when it should. That is, military physicians knowing that they are acting in the only way they can to
reduce significantly the potential loss of thousands
or even millions of human lives may reduce their
need to falsely inflate this or other rationales.
For their knowledge of the unequivocal needs for
them to act in ways that will support the military mission to have this beneficial effect, the unequivocality
CONCLUSION
Military physicians face ethical dilemmas for
which military law and regulations do not provide
resolutions. The law cannot take into account patients’ individual needs, such as those of the soldier who because of a problem with substance abuse
was threatened with loss of her retirement pension
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
357
after 19 years of service. Furthermore, the law’s ethical requirements are minimal. As an example, it
does not require psychiatrists to give more than one
warning during forensic examinations.
Several aspects of the military make it especially
important that military physicians recognize the ethical dilemmas that confront them. Military exigencies
provide unique ethical justifications for violating traditional medical norms; the military structure predisposes soldiers to be excessively compliant; and
military physicians’ identification with the military
renders them unduly vulnerable to acquiring a
skewed set of values. All these factors favor the interests of the military over those of their patients.
The core enigma underlying many ethical questions posed in the military is whether the military
physician should adopt a military role-specific
ethic, which favors military interests exclusively;
exercise independent discretion, as when deciding
whether to tell soldiers who want to be discharged
from the military how the system works and, accordingly, how they could game the system; or assume a medical role-specific ethic, which favors
patients’ medical interests exclusively. There are
criteria that potentially can help military physicians
decide which of these three alternatives to adopt.
The bulk of this chapter has been occupied with
articulating these criteria and giving examples to
illustrate them. Basically, military physicians should
adopt the military role-specific ethic when military
exigencies are so substantial that this is required,
use their discretion when highly significant adverse
consequences to the military are reduced, and use
a more patient-centered ethic when military exigencies approach being negligible. The boundaries between these three categories are indistinct and will
change. Nonetheless, this framework may be helpful in providing at least a rudimentary guideline
from which military physicians can proceed.
The anguish experienced by military physicians
facing these conflicts is an additional factor that may
affect their decision whether to adopt a role-specific ethic. Military physicians can act to attempt to
reduce this anguish in some contexts, however, in
the same adaptive way any person can respond to
situations that pose stress. They can take actions
to attempt to benefit patients by changing military
rules and regulations with which they disagree. This
was exemplified by the military physicians who
attempted to make it easier for students at military
academies with eating disorders to seek treatment.
Civilian physicians are now facing problems
similar to those faced by military physicians due to
civilian physicians recently becoming more involved in managed care. Military physicians have
much more capacity under “their” managed care
system to influence how soldiers are treated than
their civilian counterparts. Military physicians can
take advantage of this greater opportunity to make
policy that will allow them to maximally benefit
individual patients and use their discretion to treat
patients when possible in light of military necessities, as I have discussed in this chapter. This was
best exemplified, for instance, in their using military prerogatives to take away service members’
firearms when they pose a danger to themselves or
others. This civilian doctors might find more difficult to accomplish, but military physicians could
do this, not for the military as much as for these
patients.
To benefit their patients and themselves by pursuing changes in policy in an endeavor to bring military law up to ethical standards, they must follow two
practices: (1) they must be scrupulous in recognizing
the ethical dilemmas whenever they arise, and (2) they
must consistently bring them to the attention of military authorities who can address them.
The chapters in this first volume of the two-volume Military Medical Ethics textbook have “set the
stage” for the reader to understand how it was that
physicians came to be a part of the military and the
ethical dilemmas that the melding of these two professions—medicine and military—can sometimes
present. The second volume explores these issues
in great detail, beginning with the crucible of military medical ethics: the chaos of the battlefield.
REFERENCES
1.
Daniels AK. In the service of the state: The psychiatrist as double agent. Hastings Cent Rep. 1978;8(suppl):3–6.
2.
Howe EG. Medical ethics: Are they different for the military physician? Mil Med. 1981;146:837–841.
3.
Howe EG. Ethical issues regarding mixed agency of military physicians. Soc Sci Med. 1986;23:803–813.
4.
10 USC § 3723.
5.
AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Ethical issues and managed care. JAMA. 1995;273:331–335.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
358
6.
Howe EG. Managed care: “New moves,” moral uncertainty, and a radical attitude. J Clin Ethics. 1995;6:290–306.
7.
Brody H. Ethical Decisions in Medicine. Boston: Little Brown & Co; 1976: 261–262.
8.
Veatch RM. Case Studies in Medical Ethics. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1977: 245–250.
9.
Camp NM. The Vietnam war and the ethics of combat psychiatry. Am J Psychiatry. 1993;150:1000–1010.
10.
Moskop JC. A moral analysis of military medicine. Mil Med. 1998;163:76–79.
11.
Artiss KL. Combat psychiatry: From history to theory. Mil Med. 1997;162:605–609.
12.
Howe EG, Jones FD. Ethical issues in combat psychiatry. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM,
eds. Military Psychiatry: Preparing in Peace for War. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of
The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1994: 115–131.
13.
Jones FD. Traditional warfare combat stress casualties. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM,
Stokes JW, eds. In: War Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon
General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1995: 35–61.
14.
Margo KL, Margo GM. The problem of somatization in family practice. Am Fam Physician. 1994;49(8):1873–
1879.
15.
Howe EG, Martin E. The use of investigational drugs without obtaining servicepersons’ consent in the Persian
Gulf. Hastings Cent Rep. 1991;21:21–24.
16.
Mendez E Jr, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs). Letter to Mason JO, Assistant Secretary for Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, 30 October 1990. 55 Federal Register 52814 (1990).
17.
US Food and Drug Administration. Protection of Human Subjects: Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and
Clinical Investigators. Information Sheets. 1998 Update. Washington, DC: US FDA;1999: Appendix B: 21 CFR, Part
50. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/oc/ohrt/irbs/appendixb.html. Accessed 7 September 2001.
18.
Clinton WJ. Executive Order No. 13139: Improving Health Protection of Military Personnel Participating in Particular
Military Operations. Washington DC: The White House; 30 September 1999. Available at: http://
www.firebase.net/eo13139.htm. Accessed 7 September 2001.
19.
Doe v Sullivan, 938 F2d 1370.
20.
Improving health protection of military personnel participating in particular military operations [Executive
Order 13139, dated 30 September 1999]. 64 Federal Register 54175–54178 (1999). Available at: http://
www.enter.net/~jfsorg/OfficialDocuments_files/EO13139.htm. Accessed 24 October 2001.
21.
Tomich N. Physician faces court-martial over vaccine. US Medicine. 2001;37(2):1.
22.
Nass M. Anthrax vaccine, model of a response to the biologic warfare threat. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 1999;12:187–
205.
23.
Schneider CE. The Practice of Autonomy. New York: Oxford University Press; 1998.
24.
Belihar RP. Use of investigational drugs and vaccines in the theater. Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf
War Veterans’ Illnesses, Public Meeting, Use of Investigational Drugs and Vaccines in the Gulf War. Panel
meeting (afternoon session). Kansas City, Mo. January 12, 1996. Available at: http://www.gulflink.ods.mil/
cgi-bin/texis/search/gulfsearch [search on “belihar”]. Accessed 24 October 2001.
25.
Hopkins JET, Stelling HG, Voorhees TS. The marauders and the microbes. In: Stone JH, ed. Crisis Fleeting:
Original Reports on Military Medicine in India and Burma in the Second World War. Washington, DC: Office of the
Surgeon General, Department of the Army; 1969: 293–396.
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
359
26.
Condon-Rall ME, Cowdrey AE. Medical Service in the War Against Japan. Washington, DC: Center of Military
History, US Army; 1998.
27.
Beecher HK. Research and the Individual: Human Studies. Boston: Little Brown & Co; 1970: 209–210.
28.
Colback EM. Ethical issues in combat psychiatry. Mil Med. 1985;150:256–265.
29.
Ursano RJ, Jones DR. The individual’s versus the organization’s doctor? Value conflict in psychiatric aeromedical evaluation. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1981;52(11 pt 1):704–706.
30.
Takla NK, Kottman R, Bailey DA. Combat stress, combat fatigue and psychiatric disability in aircrew. Aviat
Space Environ Med. 1994;65(9):858–865.
31.
APA questions military psychiatry procedures. Psychiatric News. 17 April 1987;22:1.
32.
Morgan D. Medical ethics and law: Military confidentiality in the armed forces. J Roy Nav Med Serv. 1994;80:169–
170.
33.
Mother fights to keep daughter’s records in rape case secret. Wall Street Journal. 22 August 1996:1.
34.
1999 amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States [Executive Order 13140, 6 October 1999]. 64
Federal Register 55115–55123 (1999).
35.
Howe EG. Special problems for military psychiatrists. In: Simon RI, ed. Annual Review of Clinical Psychiatry and
the Law. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press Inc; 1991: 304–324.
36.
Kallen LH, Grodin DM, Vinet RB. Legal aspects of alcohol abuse in the Navy. Behav Sci Law. 1989;7:355–377.
37.
US Department of the Army. Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Program. Washington, DC: DA; 26
March 1999. Army Regulation 600-85.
38.
Howe EG. Ethical aspects of military physicians treating patients with HIV/Part Two: The duty to take initiative. Mil Med. 1988;153(2):72–76.
39.
Howe EG. Military law and AIDS. In: Gosten LO, Porter L, eds. International Law and AIDS: International Response, Current Issues, and Future Directions. Washington, DC: International Health Law Committee, American
Bar Association; 1992: 102–106.
40.
Howe EG. Military physicians’ legal and ethical obligations to third parties when treating servicepersons infected with human immunodeficiency virus. AIDS Public Policy J. 1987;2:46–62.
41.
Howe EG. Ethical aspects of military physicians treating patients with HIV/Part Three: The duty to protect
third parties. Mil Med. 1988;153(3):140–144.
42.
Secretary of Defense. Policy on Identification, Surveillance and Administration of Personnel Infected With Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Memorandum, 20 April 1987.
43.
Secretary of Defense. Policy on Identification, Surveillance and Disposition of Military Personnel Affected With Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Memorandum, 4 August 1988.
44.
Public Law 101-510. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991. 5 November 1990.
45.
Public Law 102-484. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1993. 23 October 1992.
46.
DoD Directive 6490. 1. Mental Health Evaluations of Members of the Armed Forces. 1 October 1997.
47.
US Air Force Regulation 168-4. Administration of Medical Activities, Section D, Safeguarding and Releasing Medical
Information, and Laws Affecting Disclosure. April 1987;Chapter 12. 6:Art 12-35.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
360
48.
US Department of the Army. Confidentiality of medical information. In: Medical Record Administration and Health
Care Documentation. Washington, DC: DA; 3 May 1999. Army Regulation 40-66; Chap 2.
49.
NAVMED US Navy Medical Command P-117 Manual of the Medical Department, Chapter 23: Reports, Forms,
and Records, Section III, Release of Information From Records. 25 November 1980;Art 70-79.
50.
Rothberg JM, Rock N, Jones FD. Suicide in US Army personnel, 1981–1982. Mil Med. 1984;149:537–541.
51.
Rothberg JM, Jones FD. Suicide in the US Army: Epidemiological and periodic aspects. Suicide Life Threat Beh.
1987;17(2):119–132.
52.
Rothberg JM, Ursano RJ, Holloway H. Suicide in the United States military. Psychiatry Ann. 1987;17:545–548.
53.
Rothberg JM, Bartone PT, Holloway HC, Marlowe DH. Life and death in the US Army. JAMA. 1990;264:2241–
2244.
54.
McDowell CP, Rothberg JM, Lande RG. Homicide and suicide in the military. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox
VL, Rothberg JM, eds. Military Psychiatry: Preparing in Peace for War. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1994: 91–113.
55.
Medical Evaluation Board: C4 AR 40–8. 15 September 1983. (Chapter 7, Medical Evaluation Boards, 7-5.b.(2)).
56.
Mitchell JR, Holmes EK. Eating Disorders. Presentation at the Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences (USUHS). Bethesda, Maryland: 27 September 1995.
57.
High Tech Gays v. Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office, 668 F Supp 1361 (ND Cal 1987).
58.
Howe EG. Ethical problems in treating military patients with human immunodeficiency diseases. J Contemp
Health Law Policy. 1987;3:111–149.
59.
Davis JS. Military policy toward homosexuals: Scientific, historical, and legal perspectives. Mil Law Rev.
1991;131:55–108.
60.
Jones FD, Koshes RJ. Homosexuality and the military. Am J Psychiatry. 1995;153:16–21.
61.
Uniform code of Military Justice, Subchapter X, Punitive Articles: Section 925, Article 125, Sodomy.
62.
Secretary of Defense. Policy on Identification, Surveillance and Disposition of Military Personnel Affected With HTLVIII. Memorandum, 24 October 1985.
63.
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1987, PL 99-661, Division A, Title 7, 705c(1986) codified in
10 USC 1074.
64.
Maze R. Hill, services debate [adverse actions] after confidential interviews. Navy Times. 29 June 1987:3.
65.
Howe EG. Ethical aspects of military physicians treating patients with HIV/Part One: The duty to warn. Mil
Med. 1988;153(1):7–11.
66.
Howe EG. Trust between military physicians and servicepersons with HIV: Implications for civilian medicine.
Biolaw. 1988;2:5101–5112.
67.
Auster SL. Confidentiality in military medicine. Mil Med. 1985;150(7):341–346.
68.
Howe EG. Confidentiality in the military. Behav Sci Law. 1989;7:317–337.
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
361
CHAPTER 12: ATTACHMENT
EVOLUTION OF INFORMED CONSENT
There were three key documents in the evolution of informed consent in military combat contingencies.
The first of these was a letter, sent from the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs to the Assistant Secretary for Health, Department of Health and Human Services, and dated 30 October 1990. 1
This is to follow up on discussions of DoD [Department of Defense] and HHS [Department of Health
and Human Services] personnel over the past weeks. As you know, the memorandum of understanding between DoD and the Food and Drug Administration [FDA] recognizes “special DoD requirements to meet national defense considerations.” Operation Desert Shield presents such special
DoD requirements.
Our contingency planning in Desert Shield has had to take into account endemic diseases in the
area and the well-publicized capabilities of the Iraqi military with respect to chemical and biological weapons. For some of these risks, we have determined that the best preventive or therapeutic
treatment calls for the use of products now under “investigational new drug” (IND) protocols of the
FDA.
These are not exotic new drugs; these drugs have well-established uses (although in contexts somewhat different from our requirements) and are believed by medical personnel in both DoD and FDA
to be safe. For example, one product consists of a very commonly used drug packaged in a special
intramuscular injector to make it readily useable by soldiers on the battlefield. Another example
involves a vaccine long recognized by the Centers for Disease Control [CDC] as the primary preventive treatment available for a particular disease, but the relative infrequency of its use has slowed
the accumulation of sufficient immunogenicity data to yet support full licensing of the product.
Still another example involves a drug in common use at a particular dosage level, but to preserve
alertness of the soldiers, we prefer a lower-dosage tablet, which is not an FDA approved product.
FDA personnel have been extremely cooperative and supportive in reviewing our proposed protocols for these products, quickly providing favorable responses to all of our submissions to date.
FDA assistance is also needed on the issue of informed consent. Under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, the general rule is that, regardless of the character of the medical evidence, any use of
an IND, whether primarily for investigational purposes or primarily for treatment purposes, must
be preceded by obtaining informed consent from the patient. The statute authorizes exceptions,
however, when the medical professionals administering the product “deem it not feasible” to obtain informed consent.
Our planning for Desert Shield contingencies has convinced us that another circumstance should be
recognized in the FDA regulation in which it would be consistent with the statute and ethically appropriate for medical professionals to “deem it not feasible” to obtain informed consent of the patient—that
circumstance being the existence of military combat exigencies, coupled with a determination that the
use of the product is in the best interest of the individual. By the term “military combat exigencies,” we
mean military combat (actual or threatened) circumstances in which the health of the individual, the
safety of other personnel and the accomplishment of the military mission require that a particular treatment be provided to a specified group of military personnel, without regard to what might be any
individual’s personal preference for no treatment or for some alternative treatment.
In all peacetime applications, we believe strongly in informed consent and its ethical foundations. In
peacetime applications, we readily agree to tell military personnel, as provided in FDA’s regulations,
that research in involved, that there may be risks or discomforts, that participation is voluntary and that
refusal to participate will involve no penalty. But military combat is different. If a soldier’s life will be
endangered by nerve gas, for example, it is not acceptable from a military standpoint to defer to whatever might be the soldier’s personal preference concerning a preventive or therapeutic treatment that
might save his life, avoid endangerment of the other personnel in his unit and accomplish the combat
mission. Based on unalterable requirements of the military field commander, it is not an option to excuse a non-consenting soldier from the military mission, nor would it be defensible militarily—or ethically—to send the soldier unprotected into danger.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
362
To those familiar with military command requirements, this is, of course, elementary. It is also very
solidly established in law through a number of Supreme Court cases establishing that special military
exigencies sometimes must supersede normal rights and procedures that apply in the civilian community. Consistent with this, long-standing military regulations state that military members may be required to submit to medical care determined necessary to preserve life, alleviate suffering or protect the
health of others.
Such special military authority carries with it special responsibility for the well-being of the military
personnel involved. Thus, we propose specific procedural limitations on the “not feasible” waiver of
informed consent based on military combat exigencies. We propose that decisions on waiving informed
consent be made on a case-by-case basis by the Commissioner, assuring an objective review outside of
military channels of all pertinent information and an independent validation of the special circumstances
presented. Further, we propose the following specific limitations: (1) That drug-by-drug requests for
waiver be accompanied by written justification based on the intended uses and the military circumstances involved; (2) that no satisfactory alternative treatment is available; (3) that available safety and
efficacy data support the proposed use of the drug or biologic product; (4) that each such request be
approved by the applicable DoD Institutional Review Board; and (5) that the waivers be time-limited.
To recap, we have nothing exotic in the works. We are methodically planning for a range of medical
treatment contingencies in Operation Desert Shield corresponding to the predictable medical problems
that might arise. Some of these contingencies require the availability of products now under IND protocols. For products that will be in the best interests of the patients, military combat exigencies may justify
deeming it not feasible to obtain informed consent. FDA’s regulation should provide the mechanism,
subject to appropriate limitations, for DoD to request on a drug-by-drug basis, and the Commissioner to
decide, that a waiver be granted in cases in which it is established that military combat exigencies make
that necessary.
Your cooperation and assistance in this regard is appreciated.
Thus, at the request of the Department of Defense (DoD), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
instituted rule 23(d) (the second of the three documents) on 21 December 1990, as a subpart of Section
50. 23—Exception from general requirements. 2
The major stipulations of the rule are:
(d)(1) Under 10 U.S.C. 1107(f) the President may waive the prior consent requirement for the administration of an investigational new drug to a member of the armed forces in connection with the
member’s participation in a particular military operation. The statute specifies that only the President may waive informed consent in this connection and the President may grant such a waiver
only if the President determines in writing that obtaining consent: is not feasible; is contrary to the
best interests of the military member; or is not in the interests of national security. The statute further provides that in making a determination to waive prior informed consent on the ground that it
is not feasible or the ground that it is contrary to the best interests of the military members involved, the President shall apply the standards and criteria that are set forth in the relevant FDA
regulations for a waiver of the prior informed consent requirements of section 505(i)(4) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(i)(4)). Before such a determination may be made
that obtaining informed consent from military personnel prior to the use of an investigational drug
(including an antibiotic or biological product) in a specific protocol under an investigational new
drug application (IND) sponsored by the Department of Defense (DoD) and limited to specific military personnel involved in a particular military operation is not feasible or is contrary to the best
interests of the military members involved the Secretary of Defense must first request such a determination from the President, and certify and document to the President that the following standards and criteria contained in paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(4) of this section have been met.
(i) The extent and strength of evidence of the safety and effectiveness of the investigational new
drug in relation to the medical risk that could be encountered during the military operation supports the drug’s administration under an IND.
(ii) The military operation presents a substantial risk that military personnel may be subject to a
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
363
chemical, biological, nuclear, or other exposure likely to produce death or serious or life-threatening injury or illness.
(iii) There is no available satisfactory alternative therapeutic or preventive treatment in relation
to the intended use of the investigational new drug.
(iv) Conditioning use of the investigational new drug on the voluntary participation of each
member could significantly risk the safety and health of any individual member who would
decline its use, the safety of other military personnel, and the accomplishment of the military
mission.
(v) A duly constituted institutional review board (IRB) established and operated in accordance
with the requirements of paragraphs (d)(2) and (d)(3) of this section, responsible for review of
the study, has reviewed and approved the investigational new drug protocol and the administration of the investigational new drug without informed consent. DoD’s request is to include the
documentation required by Sec. 56. 115(a)(2) of this chapter.
(vi) DoD has explained:
(A) The context in which the investigational drug will be administered, e.g., the setting or
whether it will be self-administered or it will be administered by a health professional;
(B) The nature of the disease or condition for which the preventive or therapeutic treatment is
intended; and
(C) To the extent there are existing data or information available, information on conditions
that could alter the effects of the investigational drug.
(vii) DoD’s recordkeeping system is capable of tracking and will be used to track the proposed
treatment from supplier to the individual recipient.
(viii) Each member involved in the military operation will be given, prior to the administration
of the investigational new drug, a specific written information sheet (including information required
by 10 U.S.C. 1107(d)) concerning the investigational new drug, the risks and benefits of its use,
potential side effects, and other pertinent information about the appropriate use of the product.
(ix) Medical records of members involved in the military operation will accurately document the
receipt by members of the notification required by paragraph (d)(1)(viii) of this section.
(x) Medical records of members involved in the military operation will accurately document the
receipt by members of any investigational new drugs in accordance with FDA regulations including part 312 of this chapter.
(xi) DoD will provide adequate followup to assess whether there are beneficial or adverse health
consequences that result from the use of the investigational product.
(xii) DoD is pursuing drug development, including a time line, and marketing approval with
due diligence.
(xiii) FDA has concluded that the investigational new drug protocol may proceed subject to a
decision by the President on the informed consent waiver request.
(xiv) DoD will provide training to the appropriate medical personnel and potential recipients on
the specific investigational new drug to be administered prior to its use.
(xv) DoD has stated and justified the time period for which the waiver is needed, not to exceed
one year, unless separately renewed under these standards and criteria.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
364
(xvi) DoD shall have a continuing obligation to report to the FDA and to the President any changed
circumstances relating to these standards and criteria (including the time period referred to in
paragraph (d)(1)(xv) of this section) or that otherwise might affect the determination to use an
investigational new drug without informed consent.
(xvii) DoD is to provide public notice as soon as practicable and consistent with classification
requirements through notice in the Federal Register describing each waiver of informed consent
determination, a summary of the most updated scientific information on the products used, and
other pertinent information.
(xviii) Use of the investigational drug without informed consent otherwise conforms with applicable law.
(2) The duly constituted institutional review board, described in paragraph (d)(1)(v) of this section,
must include at least 3 nonaffiliated members who shall not be employees or officers of the Federal
Government (other than for purposes of membership on the IRB) and shall be required to obtain
any necessary security clearances. This IRB shall review the proposed IND protocol at a convened
meeting at which a majority of the members are present including at least one member whose primary concerns are in nonscientific areas and, if feasible, including a majority of the nonaffiliated
members. The information required by Sec. 56. 115(a)(2) of this chapter is to be provided to the Secretary of Defense for further review.
(3) The duly constituted institutional review board, described in paragraph (d)(1)(v) of this section,
must review and approve:
(i) The required information sheet;
(ii) The adequacy of the plan to disseminate information, including distribution of the information sheet to potential recipients, on the investigational product (e.g., in forms other than written);
(iii) The adequacy of the information and plans for its dissemination to health care providers,
including potential side effects, contraindications, potential interactions, and other pertinent considerations; and
(iv) An informed consent form as required by part 50 of this chapter, in those circumstances in
which DoD determines that informed consent may be obtained from some or all personnel involved.
(4) DoD is to submit to FDA summaries of institutional review board meetings at which the proposed protocol has been reviewed.
(5) Nothing in these criteria or standards is intended to preempt or limit FDA’s and DoD’s authority
or obligations under applicable statutes and regulations.
In 1999, President Clinton signed Executive Order No. 13139 (the third of the three documents), Improving Health Protection of Military Personnel Participating in Particular Military Operations,3 to address what
was seen as an ongoing military threat requiring preventive medical efforts. The text of the order is as
follows:
30 September 1999
By the Authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of
America, including section 1107 of title 10, United States Code, and in order to provide the best
health protection to military personnel participating in particular military operations, it is hereby
ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. Military personnel deployed in particular military operations could potentially be
Mixed Agency in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict
365
exposed to a range of chemical, biological, and radiological weapons as well as diseases endemic to
an area of operations. It is the policy of the United States Government to provide our military personnel with safe and effective vaccines, antidotes, and treatments that will negate or minimize the
effects of these health threats.
Sec. 2. Administration of Investigational New Drugs to Members of the Armed Forces.
(a) The Secretary of Defense (Secretary) shall collect intelligence on potential health threats that
might be encountered in an area of operations. The Secretary shall work together with the Secretary of Health and Human Services to ensure appropriate countermeasures are developed. When
the Secretary considers an investigational new drug or a drug unapproved for its intended use
(investigational drug) to represent the most appropriate countermeasure, it shall be studied
through scientifically based research and development protocols to determine whether it is safe
and effective for its intended use.
(b) it is the expectation that the United States Government will administer products approved
for their intended use by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
REFERENCES
1.
Mendez E Jr, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs). Letter to Mason JO, Assistant Secretary for Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, 30 October 1990. 55 Federal Register 52814 (1990).
2.
US Food and Drug Administration. Protection of Human Subjects: Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and
Clinical Investigators. Information Sheets. 1998 Update. Washington, DC: US FDA;1999: Appendix B: 21 CFR Part
50. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/oc/ohrt/irbs/appendixb.html. Accessed 7 September 2001.
3.
Clinton WJ. Executive Order No. 13139: Improving Health Protection of Military Personnel Participating in Particular
Military Operations. Washington DC: The White House; 30 September 1999. Available at: http://
www.denix.osd.mil/denix/Public/Legislation/EO/note54.html. Accessed 7 September 2001.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
366
