127
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
MILITARY MEDICAL ETHICS
VOLUME I
SECTION II: MILITARY ETHICS
Section Editor:
ANTHONY E. HARTLE, PHD
Professor of Philosophy, Department of English
United States Military Academy, West Point, New York
Frank Thomas
Desert Storm, Iraq
1991
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
128
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
129
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
Chapter 5
THE PROFESSION OF ARMS AND THE
OFFICER CORPS
ANTHONY E. HARTLE, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
Lieutenant Stone’s Dilemma: Case Study
Professional Ethics as a Moral Compass
ROOTED IN HISTORY
Warriors and Soldiers
The State
From Roman Legionnaires to Modern Military Professionals
THE MILITARY TODAY
Characteristics of the Profession
The American Professional Military Ethic
Pluralism and the Professional Military Ethic
Moral Dilemmas of Leadership: Case Study
Lieutenant Stone Revisited: Can His Dilemma Be Resolved?
CONCLUSION
*Colonel, Corps of Professors, United States Military Academy, United States Army; Professor of Philosophy, Department of English, United
States Military Academy, West Point, New York 10996-1791; formerly, Infantry Company Commander, 199th Light Infantry Brigade (Vietnam, 1968–1969)
130
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
H. Charles McBarron
Follow Me
Leyte, 1944
When General MacArthur’s Sixth Army landed on Leyte in October, 1944, the Japanese resisted furiously. Soldiers
supported by Navy bombardments, trained and led by members of the Army profession, regained control of the
Philippines after bitter fighting. The principles and values that laid the foundation for victory in World War II continue to shape the Army in the 21st century. Those principles and values are the subject of this chapter. Image available at: http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/art/a&i/AVOP-0599.htm.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
131
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
INTRODUCTION
For participants, brutality dominates memories
of war. War coerces, inexorably eroding humanity
the longer it grinds. Professionalism, with its emphasis on competence and discipline, provides one
of the defenses against brutalization, though professional conduct has other, more obvious purposes. The
case study that follows suggests the coercion of warfare and the difficulty of reading the moral compass
in the light of battle. The subsequent discussion will
consider how the features of the moral compass for
military professionals have come into being and what
guidance that compass provides today.
Lieutenant Stone’s Dilemma: Case Study
Lieutenant (LT) Stone’s infantry platoon has received
orders to withdraw from an isolated forward position and
move to another location quite some distance away as
his brigade makes a major adjustment in the forward line
of defense. He is waiting for two foot reconnaissance patrols to return from earlier missions forward into enemy
territory.
One of the three-man teams returns—escorting a prisoner. The patrol leader, Staff Sergeant (SSG) Trask,
tensely explains that perhaps 20 minutes ago his team,
in hiding, observed an enemy squad moving away from
the front with the platoon’s other reconnaissance patrol
marching along, hands bound, obviously prisoners.
Trask’s men had seized the trailing enemy soldier after
the others had gone around a rock outcropping and had
then raced back to the platoon for reinforcements. Trask
emotionally requests the chance to take a squad out to
rescue the captive platoon members. The enemy has
become notorious for the barbaric murder of POWs (prisoners of war). Trask reports that the enemy prisoner has
already stated that the enemy squad was taking the
American POWs to a collection point.
Trask says, “If I leave now, I can catch them if I know
where that collection point is. We can’t abandon those
people, Lieutenant! The one we captured refuses to tell
where the collection point is, but give him to me for 15
minutes and I’ll find out! We owe it to these guys to do
everything we can. Once we pull out, we’ll never see them
again!”
LT Stone decides that if he can determine the location of the enemy collection point, they do have time for
a quick foray to find the POWs before the platoon must
move to the rear. Unless he can move directly to the collection point, however, he will not have time. He cannot
undertake a dangerous and time-consuming search.
Rapid attempts to reach his company headquarters fail;
he is temporarily out of communication. Stone intensely
feels the pressure to act. He fully recognizes the compelling obligation to rescue his soldiers in the short time
available. His chain of command has long preached that
“we take care of our own,” repeatedly emphasizing that
“we don’t leave men behind, alive or dead—we bring them
home.” He debates whether he should turn the prisoner
over to SSG Trask for interrogation, which he knows will
involve physical abuse because the prisoner has already
refused to talk.
What factors should he consider in deciding
what to do? No matter what choice he makes, he
will have to override some of his moral concerns.
Professional Ethics as a Moral Compass
How military professionals should answer such
questions is the concern in the discussion that follows. Under stress, the kind of stress portrayed in
the prisoner scenario, individuals often do not react logically; they tend to make snap decisions
based on their emotions, experiences, and training
rather than on rational analysis. Because military
decisions so often have serious consequences, the
military institution emphasizes the training of individual leaders, the criteria for making difficult
decisions, and the professional values that should
provide the structure for decision making.
In the historical development of the profession
of arms that follows, those aspects that have led to
the current institutional expectations concerning
the conduct and character of military professionals receive particular emphasis. The content and application of the professional military ethic that today guides the actions of leaders in the American
military services then undergoes scrutiny. At its
conclusion, the discussion will return to Lieutenant Stone and his dilemma.
ROOTED IN HISTORY
In his discussion of war, Dyer claims that “[o]ur
gravest error in the late twentieth century is to overestimate our distance and difference from the
past.”1(p4) He observes, as many have, that the individual soldier “has changed remarkably little over
the ten thousand years or so that armies have
existed,”1(p4) but he goes on to emphasize a critical
point: The consequences of war have changed dramatically. 1 War has always resulted in suffering and
death; today militaries are much more efficient at
132
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
destruction than ever before. In addition, the institution within which the soldier bearing arms lives
and fights has changed in ways that have importance for citizens and soldiers alike. Because so
much of human experience in war is the same, however, despite how much has changed, to understand
today’s military establishment, one must know
something of its history.
In part because the consequences of war have
assumed such critical importance for the larger,
more highly structured societies of the modern
world, the last two centuries have seen the development of professional military forces. Professional
armies are not a development peculiar to the modern
world. In all probability, ancient Egypt in certain
periods maintained well-trained, highly experienced armies of men who made careers of fighting
wars, but in the period that military historians know
well, from AD 900 to the present, professional armies
came into being only during the last two centuries.
At the same time that the role of the soldier in society has been formalized, the incredible carnage of
war in this century has led to observations such as
Gelven’s: “The spectacle of countless youths bent
on mutual destruction seems to qualify as something unintelligible. What could possibly justify the
immeasurable suffering of a battlefield? Surely
war, among all human activities, deserves the ultimate censure.”2(p4) Although it may not be possible
to answer Gelven’s penetrating question adequately,
militaries can look carefully at the profession of
arms, past and present, in order to understand how
reasonable persons can pursue a military career as
a calling and how military professionals can look
upon their contributions as an exceptional service
to the country. In the process, the professional
framework for decision making in situations like
that faced by Lieutenant Stone will be explored.
To provide a deeper understanding of the profession of arms in the context of society today, it is helpful to briefly trace the development of the warriors of
ancient societies into contemporary military professionals. Military institutions have evolved into complex organizations bound by custom and law in the
pursuit of politically mandated objectives. Thus, a
military culture has developed with distinctive features. In particular, to further understanding of the
function of the military in American society, the following discussion examines the professional and
moral guidelines that limit permissible action by those
who exercise military force in the name of the state.
That examination will provide some insight into the
role and perspectives of those who choose a career of
defending the United States by force of arms. An adequate analysis must also consider the problem of
conflicting values that results when members of a
culturally diverse society join America’s armed forces,
which promulgate a demanding professional ethic.
Warriors and Soldiers
To begin, one must step far back in time. Archeological evidence makes clear that armed men played
a central role in the life of societies long before written records appeared. Besides to hunt more effectively, men have taken up arms to defend themselves, their families, and their communities from
a variety of external threats that often included
other people. In primitive societies, however, combat between tribes and communities frequently displayed the characteristics of ritual rather than the
familiar modern ones of high-intensity warfare
and high political stakes. Primitive war can be
characterized as “organized armed conflict”3(p48) between members of “relatively small, stateless
societies.”3(p48) Although such fighting could be particularly merciless and brutal, cultural controls
regulated and limited combat. The historian Keegan
relates Divale’s report of contemporary tribal conflict among the Maring of New Guinea, which is
also considered typical of primitive warfare in prehistoric times. 4(p98) Fighting took place
in a pre-defined area of no man’s land along the
borders of the warring groups. Each army was composed of warriors, usually related by marriage,
from several allied villages. Even though large
numbers of warriors were involved, there was little
or no organized military effort; instead, dozens of
individual duels were engaged in. Each warrior
shouted insults at his opponent and hurled spears
or fired arrows. Agility in dodging arrows was
highly praised and young warriors pranced
about.… In spite of the huge array of warriors
involved in these pitched battles, little killing took
place. Because of the great distance between
warriors and the relative inefficiency of primitive weapons, combined with a young warrior’s agility to dodge arrows, direct hits rarely
occurred. 5(ppxxi–xxii)
A set of conditions after 10,000 BC triggered a
momentous change that altered the nature of conflict described above. More structured governing
organizations, population pressures, agricultural
development that made land highly prized, and
other factors in combination led to the widespread
establishment of armies. Expanding societies turned
133
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
from ritualized combat between warriors to
the pursuit of conquest by large, organized military forces. In disciplined, trained military formations, the warriors became soldiers, and over the
centuries between 9000 and 3000 BC, civilization and
politics introduced systematic warfare. 4(pp124–126) Indeed, the change was so marked that some commentators go so far as to observe that “by the time we
begin to have a clear picture of the civilized world as
a whole, around three thousand years ago, armed
force dominates everything.”1(p33) Keegan observes
that “[t]he written history of the world is largely a
history of warfare, because the states within which
we live came into existence largely through conquest,
civil strife or struggles for independence.”4(p386) While
his observation may suggest an overemphasis on conflict at the expense of technology as a factor shaping
human history, wars do provide the great benchmarks
in the record of civilization.
The State
Progression of social organization from the family to the village to the region to the “state” reflects
response to human needs. Whether the need for
organized armed forces provided the impetus for
organizing the state, or whether the emergence of
the state brought the genesis of armies, it is clear
that the developments were intertwined. Only the
state could create and support a large, standing
military force. At the same time, the army was essential to the existence of the state. The Sumerian
Empire in Mesopotamia provides a striking example of the state–army symbiosis. Following the
consolidation by conquest of Mesopotamia into a
large state called Sumer around 2350 BC, the
Sumerian kings established a military organization
with aspects startlingly similar to those of modern
military forces: standing armies housed in permanent barracks, standardized weapons, logistical
planning on a large scale, the architecture of fortification, and systematically developed methods of
siegecraft. In short, they pursued the activity of
warfare with as insightful a grasp of efficiency and
functional requirements as the American military
employs today. Sargon of Agade, one of the strongest Sumerian rulers in the area now known as Iraq,
fought at least 34 wars during his reign according
to historical records, an observation that certainly
supports the claim that war and armed force came
to dominate human affairs. 4(p135) Military force made
the developed state possible; the state made military efficiency on a large scale possible.
In the view of national leaders for more than four
millennia, military forces have been necessary. Even
the most casual perusal of history indicates that conflict between and within societies appears inevitable.
Living in large groups has given human beings the
opportunity to increase technology and knowledge
in ways not otherwise possible, and most members
of those groups have benefited, but alongside those
developments war has emerged as a looming threat
to both society and progress. In a world of limited
resources and competing interests, states unable to
defend themselves frequently suffer at the hands
of states with greater power. Despite the pacifist’s
argument that nonresistance would minimize human suffering no matter what the nature of the
predator state might be, most nations are prepared
to defend with force the property, persons, and primary interests of their citizens. Many argue that
such activities constitute the raison d’être of the state.
In addition to facing external threats, viable states
must enforce cooperation among and maintain control of their citizens; in the modern world, doing so
has frequently required the use of military assets.
One result of the evolution of the modern nationstate, combined with ever-advancing weapons technology, has been the inauguration of an extremely
dangerous period in human history, a claim with
few dissenters among those who experienced the
culmination of that development in the Cold War
and the chilling threat of nuclear annihilation.
Today’s threats of international instability and
nuclear proliferation provide little relief.
Returning to the ancient period, the preeminent
state and most dominant army emerged in Rome.
Historians consider Rome the “mother house of modern armies.”4(pp263–281) Beginning in the fifth century BC,
the Roman Empire began to expand, subsequently
using the fierce discipline and merciless efficiency of
the legions in an ever-widening circle of conquest. In
the view of Keegan, “[t]he Roman centurions, longservice unit-leaders drawn from the best of the enlisted ranks, formed the first body of professional
fighting officers known to history.”4(p268)
At its height during the second century AD, the
Roman Empire through the legions controlled provinces stretching from Gibraltar to Hadrian’s Wall
on the Scottish border, encompassing most of modern Europe and the Middle East, and then extending across all of northern Africa to Morocco. Contemporary military forces whose members take
pride in their traditions and successes pale in
achievement when the record of the legions of Rome
over nearly six centuries is considered. The pur134
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
poses to which Rome put her professional soldiers
may well be questioned, but few question the dedication and the sacrifices of the legions. The
centurionate, the professional core of the legions,
provided the great strength of an army that dominated the known world for century after century.
The higher ranking leadership came from the upper levels of Roman society and came steadily because service as a tribune was a prerequisite for
political service leading to the ruling consulate and
imperial power. 4(p268)
Notable also is the role the military played in the
evolution of Roman society. The following comment
by a noted historian suggests its centrality:
Rome, unlike classical Greece, was a civilisation of
law and of physical achievement, not of speculative ideas and artistic creativity. The imposition of
its laws and the relentless extension of its extraordinary physical infrastructure demanded not so
much intellectual effort as unstinted energy and
moral discipline. It was of these qualities that the
army was the ultimate source…4(p283)
Even though no one makes so strong a claim for
the military services in America today, the military
remains a repository of some of the primary values
that have formed American society and its institutions. Further emphasizing the historical importance of the Roman tradition, one can observe that
the professional soldier of the Empire lived in a
context of values that would certainly seem familiar to members of today’s military. That observation suggests the influence of the Roman tradition,
to some extent, but even more it reveals the functional demands of the profession of arms. As one
military historian notes of the legionnaire, “His
values were those by which his fellows in the modern age continue to live: pride in a distinctive (and
distinctively masculine) way of life, concern to enjoy the good opinion of comrades, satisfaction in
the largely symbolic tokens of professional success,
hope of promotion, expectation of a comfortable
and honourable retirement.”4(p270) And throughout,
of course, the life of the legionnaire required iron
discipline and demanded extraordinary loyalty.
Legendary names from the Roman era continue
to echo through the annals of military history:
Cornelius Scipio, Scipio Africanus, Julius Caesar,
Caesar Augustus, Vespasian, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, Marcus Aurelius. The legions went far
in establishing the historical context from which
modern military organizations emerged in the Western world.
From Roman Legionnaires to Modern Military
Professionals
Feudalism
Five centuries after the Visigoths sacked Rome
in AD 410, men still fought in the same manner,
though not nearly as efficiently as had the legions.
The swarming horse cavalry of the steppes and the
Arab world were ferociously successful, but their
contributions to military development were tactical rather than formative. After the disciplined Roman armies disappeared, well-organized and enduring military organizations serving the state did
not reappear until the 16th century AD.
During the interim period, and especially after
the advent of the Crusades in the 11th century, chivalry became a dominating feature of European military culture. Overlaying the brutality of the Crusades with the development of chivalry appears
incongruous at first glance, but the influence of the
Catholic Church and the founding of knightly orders led to refinements in the outlook and conduct
of fighting men. Enemies in battle (other than heretics, unbelievers, and peasants who failed to adhere to their appropriate class roles) were to be accorded respect and treated in accordance with an
elaborate code of honor.
Throughout the medieval centuries, the feudal
system, in which the mounted man-at-arms was the
central figure, dominated Europe. As General
Hackett notes, the feudal knight “followed his calling primarily for the maintenance or improvement
of the economic and social position of his family as
a land-holding unit. Military service was one of only
two ways that were in practice open to him (the
other being holy orders) for the acquisition of further wealth and prestige.”6(p25)
In the highly regulated feudal system, the feudal man-at-arms had an obligation to serve a specific person under a specific contract in which “[a]
benefit was conferred (tenancy of land was by far
the most common form of it) in return for which
military service was required.”6(p25) In addition to
the knights, foot soldiers served, “also discharging
a personal obligation to give military service. Such
interruptions to normal life were unwelcome but
of short duration. The forces thus produced were
usually cumbrous, ill-armed, and of low military
value”6(p28) in the opinion of Hackett. Loyalty, however, became firmly embedded in the concept of
military character as a result of the patterns established during the period of feudal society. During
135
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
this period, loyalty was the indispensable virtue.
To the courtesies owed to fellow members of the
knightly class, the religious knightly orders such
as the Templars and the Hospitallers added the
characteristics of discipline in personal affairs as
well as in battle, unwavering loyalty to the order,
and service to a higher cause. The latter two characteristics also became lasting features of the European military culture, though the example of the
mercenary soldier obscured that picture for some
time. Before the professional in the service of the
state returned to the military scene in Europe, mercenaries played a necessary but troublesome role.
Mercenaries and Militia
Conflict among the city states of Italy in the 14th
century led to the employment of contracted mercenary soldiers who fought for pay and transferred
their loyalty accordingly. For a century, landless
soldiers of fortune formed companies in Germany,
England, the Swiss cantons, and elsewhere, selling
their services to political leaders, most prominently
in Italy. Contracted to provide security, the mercenaries in fact created a continuous threat to the stability of governments. As Hackett notes:
Machiavelli … saw that the Italian cities had made
a serious error, an error which was in fact to prove
fatal. He realized the intimate connection between
military techniques and political methods, between
military organizations and political institutions. He
saw that the cities, whose competitive development
was bound to lead to conflict, had completely failed
to evolve military forms appropriate to their political structure.…Machiavelli dreamed of an Italy
united under Florence, and in looking for a suitable military form it was almost inevitable that he
should turn to Rome.…He saw war as total and all
embracing. The whole resources of the state should
be applied to it and the only criterion of warlike methods should be their effectiveness. 6(pp52–56)
The Roman tradition had relied upon the idea of
a citizen army, an arm of the state, and that concept
gradually reentered Western institutions, coming to
full flower under Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden
in the 1600s in the midst of European powers who
still relied upon mercenary forces. “Gustavus
Adolphus … successfully developed and applied
[the Roman model] on the battlefield, and the system he evolved persisted in its essentials well into
the twentieth century.”6(p58) That system involved
conscripted soldiers, generally linear formations,
smaller units (though larger armies), and more junior leaders who had to exercise some initiative.
Adolphus’ commanders endlessly drilled infantry
units in precise formations, prepared them for specific tactical maneuvers, and used cavalry elements
for shock action.
Sweden’s great success with its citizen army was
a factor leading to the development of standing
armies. The militia, a military force consisting of
citizens who retained their status as citizens only
by accepting their responsibility to train for war and
perform military duties in time of danger, returned
to dominate military affairs. Sovereigns raised and
paid for the militias that subsequently evolved into
standing military forces. As Hackett notes, “It had
become common in the mid-seventeenth century to
keep 160–200,000 men under arms even in peace—
twelve times as many as at the end of the sixteenth
century.”6(p61)
In a related development, Charles VII of France,
attempting to organize and control mercenary companies that pursued their own interests to a degree
that threatened sovereignty, initiated the regimental system. He appointed major landholders in
the realm as regimental colonels, paid them out of the
royal treasury, and required them to raise and maintain a force of about a thousand soldiers. Regiments
became a permanent feature of the newly emerging
European states and developed highly individualized
cultures of their own. Military historians are most familiar with the British regiments, some of whom trace
their lineage back several centuries.
Professional Beginnings
The turn to a militia organization and the regimental system completed the reorientation that led
to national military establishments. In Europe of the
17th and 18th centuries, in the midst of the Enlightenment and the flourishing of science and human
progress, each state believed that it could ensure
its survival only by developing military forces sufficient to defend against other states pursuing their
interests at the expense of their neighbors. Under
the two Fredericks, Prussia successfully joined a
system of harsh discipline and conscript service
supplemented by mercenaries with an aristocratic
and largely amateur officer corps.
The Prussian example led to European armies
that marched and countermarched, participated in
few decisive battles, and served particular but limited state interests. War was the sport of kings, with
causes and ideologies playing no significant roles.
The period brought better firearms, fewer bloody
136
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
battles, and less prestige for the military. Nonetheless, that period presaged a great sea change in the
development of military organization. The features
of the professional military, as that term is understood today, can be found in the European armies
of the mid-1700s, even though the professional
officer corps came into its own only after the Napoleonic wars. The officer ranks had begun to develop the characteristics described by Huntington
in his penetrating study of military sociology: corporate unity, career structure, and specialized
training. 7(pp37–39) Army and navy officers were about
to become not just masters of their trade, as many
undoubtedly had been over the centuries, but members of a profession, a distinction that requires some
explanation.
To begin, it must be noted that the French Revolution and Napoleon’s subsequent rise to power
changed the face of warfare. The notion of freedom
took hold and infused the citizenry of France with
a national zeal and enthusiasm that changed the
character of war and the military institution. The
levée en masse, the idea of an entire nation taking up
arms, led initially to huge armies of hastily trained
soldiers, the mobilization of national industry, and
the need for professional leadership. The precision
and the ceremony of European warfare came
abruptly to an end, and, in the words of Hackett,
“The age of limited war was over.”6(p87) The European states came to recognize that a full-time, professional officer corps was essential to the successful conduct of modern warfare.
The Germans, facing Napoleon’s mass armies,
had to find new means and resources. Frederick the
Great’s small formations of well-drilled conscripts
and mercenaries provided no answer to Napoleon’s
challenge. Instead, the Germans turned to universal conscription and (eventually) an officer corps
selected on the basis of merit rather than social class.
The Prussian military identified merit both in terms
of performance and through the systematic training and preparation of members of the officer corps.
In fairly short order, other nations followed suit,
thus providing the basis for the following observation: “Before 1800 there was virtually no such thing
as a professional officer corps anywhere. After 1900
no sovereign power of any significance … was without one.”6(p99)
Many developments revealed the need for professional skills, but the enormous increase in logistical requirements in the 19th century provides an
obvious one. Large, technologically advanced
armies called for professional military logisticians.
Amateur soldiers could not meet the demands of
the campaigns that followed the Napoleonic era, as
the following description illustrates:
Napoleon’s artillery at Waterloo [1815] … numbered 246 guns which fired about a hundred rounds
each during the battle; in 1870 at Sedan, one of the
most noted battles of the nineteenth century, the
Prussian army fired 33,134 rounds; in the week
before the opening of the battle of the Somme [in
World War I], British artillery fired 1,000,000
rounds, a total weight of some 20,000 tons of metal
and explosive. 8(p309)
As a result of these and other requirements in
other aspects of combat operations, the military
evolved into a profession, if by profession one means
an occupation with a distinguishable corpus of specific technical knowledge and doctrine, a more or
less exclusive group coherence, a complex of institutions peculiar to itself, an educational pattern
adapted to its own specific needs, a career structure of its own and a distinct place in the society
which has brought it forth. 6(p9)
Intended to develop a well-rounded picture of the
profession of arms today, the material that follows
presents other concepts of military professionalism.
Although the discussion adds characteristics such
as self-regulation and commitment to society, the
definition above certainly conveys some of the most
essential aspects of the professional military establishment.
The Prussians led the way toward professionalization by lowering class barriers for officer appointments, establishing entry standards that candidates had to meet, and beginning an educational
system for career officers that General von Scharnhorst completed in 1810 by establishing the famous
Kriegsakademie in Berlin. He also required comprehensive examinations for officers seeking promotion. 6(p103)
Although it is true that the French officer corps
moved toward professional status more slowly than
the Prussians in terms of competency requirements
and the quality of their military educational system,
they did establish a school for staff officers in 1818
and the Ecole Militaire Supérieure in 1878. 6(p121) The
British Army, however, while it opened the Royal
Military College in 1802, clung to its class-based
standards for officer commissioning much longer,
abolishing the practice of members of the aristocracy
purchasing their commissions only in 1871. 6(p104) The
result was an army officer corps noted throughout
most of the 19th century for its bravery but marked
by amateur performance. Britain’s strength was her
navy, which, even though social status remained a
137
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
prominent aspect of gaining opportunities, placed
great emphasis on competence and long experience.
Dominating the seas, the key to the British Empire,
required highly capable leadership.
The United States began with an abiding distrust
of standing armies and “men on horseback,” largely
as a result of experience with the British and the
background of European history, with its Caesars,
Cromwells, and Napoleons. That attitude can be
traced as late as World War II. Not too surprisingly,
military professionalism developed slowly in
America. In between foreign crises requiring the
commitment of armed forces, the nation’s military
invariably declined in strength and readiness, with
a corresponding decrease in the prestige and attention accorded the officer corps. From the beginning,
the United States applied a militia concept that continues in modified form today (the Reserves and
National Guard) as a vital complement to the regular forces.
Despite the Revolutionary War, the American
military largely adopted the traditions of the British officer corps: An officer is a gentleman, a man
of courage and unquestioned integrity. Those who
led American forces, after all, had grown up as British citizens. Janowitz claims that the American military inherited four central elements from the British military tradition: (1) gentlemanly conduct, (2)
personal fealty, (3) self-evaluating brotherhood, and
(4) the pursuit of glory. If by glory one understands
an esteem for patriotism, for leadership in combat,
and for public service, and if one accepts that 200
years have removed the aristocratic tenor of honor
from American officership, Janowitz’s observation
appears accurate. 9(pp217–218) For the century that followed the establishment of the United States, however, the characteristics of a profession emerged
slowly. During much of the 19th century, America’s
best-educated Army officers, graduates of the United
States Military Academy at West Point, which was
established in 1802, were better known as engineers
than as battlefield leaders. Although the Civil War
(1861–1865) changed that, after the war the US Army
became little more than a constabulary in the West,
fighting and policing the Native American tribes.
Not until the turn of the century did the military
profession as it exists today in the United States
begin to take shape. During that period the US
Army and US Navy established permanent schools
for advanced military education and began to develop systematic processes of educating and training career professionals.
THE MILITARY TODAY
Characteristics of the Profession
As Janowitz notes, “In broadest terms, the professional soldier can be defined as a person who
has made the military establishment the locus of
his [or her] career.”9(p54) The military professional’s
expert knowledge and skills center on the systematic application of violence, the specialized service
the professional provides the parent society. That
unique expertise sets him apart from other professional groups. The knowledge and skills necessary
to support a large, modern military force, however,
extend far beyond combat-related activity. In the
military today, there are physicians, veterinarians,
labor relations specialists, television announcers,
and innumerable other specialists associated with
distinctly civilian pursuits.
Who qualifies as a military professional in the
highly complex, heterogeneous American military
services? Soldiers, sailors, and airmen who serve
for 3 to 5 years and return to the civilian world (the
majority of the members of the military services)
serve in a professional organization but do not
qualify as military professionals under the parameters established in the preceding discussion. They
do not possess the mastery of disciplinary knowledge and the degree of participation in self-direction and self-regulation that distinguish professional activity. Senior noncommissioned officers,
however, demonstrate strong attributes of professionalism, and the commissioned officer corps generally appears to fit precisely into the professional
category. But many military officers, nonetheless,
are exceptions, as a pediatrician in a military hospital so appears. At the ends of the spectrum, one
can identify the purely military professional and the
supporting cast that provides services not at all
peculiar to the military. In practice, however, it is
not easy to draw the line between military professionals and others in the military. Thus professionalism and membership in the military profession
are probably best described as matters of degree.
The reference to degree appears in other contexts,
as the following quotation reveals:
There is no absolute difference between professional and other kinds of occupational behavior, but
only relative differences with respect to certain attributes common to all occupational behavior.…
[On this view] the medical profession is more professional than the nursing profession, and the medi138
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
cal doctor who does university research is more
professional than the medical doctor who provides
minor medical services in a steel plant. Professionalism is a matter of degree. 10(p18)
Complicating the issue of membership in the
profession, in addition to the idea of a spectrum of
degree noted above, is the fact that “the military
profession consists of a mixture of heroic leaders,
military managers, and technical specialists, and one
officer can come to embody various mixtures of these
elements”9(pxiii) (emphasis added). Such complications notwithstanding, most American officers and
career noncommissioned officers today clearly
qualify as military professionals, and many other
service members qualify to some degree.
To understand the role of the American military
professional today, it is necessary to explore the relationship between the military and the society it
serves. It is also necessary to recognize the influences
that have shaped the military culture that has
evolved. Within that culture corporateness dominates, partly as a result of the specialized training and
education that all members of the military receive.
Relationship to the Parent Society
One indelible characteristic of the American military that emerged from its first century of development remains foundational: The military is entirely
subordinate to and responsive to the civilian leadership of the nation. (See Chapter 7, The Military
and its Relationship to the Society It Serves, for a
further discussion of this relationship.) That feature
receives little attention when American military forces
are considered because it is so deeply ingrained in
American consciousness. In Latin America, however, and in many countries in the Middle East, Asia,
and elsewhere, such subordination is decidedly not
the case, and to note that military cultures differ
markedly from one society to another raises no
questions because the statement is so obviously true.
In a number of countries that can be mentioned, the
military is the government. Until recently, the military dominated life in Haiti, Brazil, and Argentina,
as it still does in Myanmar and a number of African countries. If one is to understand the military
profession, it is necessary to understand why military establishments differ in these obvious ways—
and why they nonetheless share so many features.
When the major formative influences on military
organizations are recognized, both the differences
and the similarities can be more readily explained.
The nature and structure of any military organization result in part, and in large part, from the basic
exigencies of warfare. Both leaders and subordinates must possess competence in the use of weapons, the application of effective tactics, and the provision of support necessary to sustain combat if the
military organization is to be effective. Such skills
represent one of the essential characteristics of any
profession: a set of abilities acquired as a result of
prolonged training and education that enable the
professional to render a specialized service. 9(p5) The
weapons, the tactics, and the organizational structures of military establishments may differ radically
as a result of different circumstances, but certain
requirements will always exist. Those requirements
will shape the nature of any professional military
group. In particular, those requirements will shape
the ethos that provides direction, purpose, and
guidelines for the conduct of military affairs.
Shaping Influences
There are three shaping influences—the functional requirements imposed by the nature of military operations, the proscriptions of the international laws of war and the principles that underlie
those laws, and the dominant values of the society in
whose interests the military serves. Each of the major
shaping influences merits careful consideration.
Functional Requirements. Three primary factors
shape the professional military ethic (PME) of every
country’s armed forces today. 11(pp24–35) They include
the functional requirements of effective combat
operations noted above. Though functional necessities vary greatly in detail over time and in differing
circumstances, the general nature of such requirements remains constant. In broad terms, any consistently successful military organization must have
members who possess physical courage; soldiers
who flee the battlefield will not win. Soldiers and
sailors must be courageous and physically strong
if they are to prevail. Military organizations must
also be sufficiently disciplined, with a recognized
hierarchy of authority, to ensure that orders are carried out consistently and reliably. Individual soldiers must possess the skills necessary to employ
weapons and equipment in the accomplishment of
tactical missions, and commanders must possess
both traits of character and tactical skills required
to pursue military objectives successfully without
excessive losses. These broadly described functional
requirements involved in the systematic application
of force will be essentially constant from one society to another. Huntington observed of the military
profession—with emphasis on profession—that it
139
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
exists to serve the state. To render the highest possible service the entire profession and the military
force which it leads must be constituted as an effective instrument of state policy. Since political direction only comes from the top, this means that
the profession has to be organized into a hierarchy
of obedience. For the profession to perform its function, each level within it must be able to command
the instantaneous and loyal obedience of subordinate levels. Without those relationships, military
professionalism is impossible. Consequently, loyalty and obedience are the highest military
virtues. 7(p73)
Without disciplined organization, military units
cannot maintain obedience. Huntington and others
have shown that the requirements of the military
profession demand loyalty, obedience, and discipline no matter what particular nation or society
may be involved. As has been noted, the values of
technical competence and physical courage also
arise directly from the nature of military activity.
In some form, over time, such functional requirements will become institutionalized as standards of
conduct for members of the armed forces. Functional
requirements thus emerge as one of the major factors shaping the PME of any military organization.
The Laws of War. A second factor that shapes a
PME, the international laws of war, has become
progressively more prominent in this century.
Chapter 8, Just War Doctrine and the International
Law of War, will address this subject in detail. With
essentially all countries now being signatories to
the most important international treaties and conventions governing the conduct of war, all military
organizations are affected by the existing laws. The
degree to which a specific military ethic has incorporated the principles manifested in the laws of war
may vary considerably, but those existing laws exert a persistent influence that cannot be ignored.
Moral principles ground the international laws of
warfare as they now exist. To the extent that a PME
recognizes and incorporates the provisions of the
laws of war, it incorporates the following two underlying humanitarian principles: (1) Individual
persons deserve respect as such, and (2) Human
suffering ought to be minimized. 11(pp55–84)
Values of Society. The third and most complex
factor that influences the content of a PME, one that
further circumscribes and limits the other two,
emerges from the dominant values of the society
that create and sustain the military institution. None
of the institutions or practices of society are born
in isolation or unchanging over time. The purposes,
concerns, and interests of the people involved in
an institution give it life and mold its nature. Overall, its members are products of their society. The
structures of all social institutions reflect basic cultural values, patterns of value that change very
gradually. Military institutions accordingly reflect
the influence of those same patterns. Because societies differ in these features, the military cultures
that develop within them will differ as well, despite
the common professional exigencies. One can thus
understand why subordination to civilian authority, such a dominant feature of the American military, does not characterize the military forces of
some other nations.
Specialized Education and Training
Despite some skeptical views of the military’s
professional status, which include concerns about
“a trade devoted to slaughter” and the view that a
career soldier is a “paid jack-of-all-trades,”12(p16) the
profession of arms exemplifies the general pattern
of specialized education and training that leads to
a profession-peculiar body of knowledge and expertise. Following a diversified basic education,
career members of the American military undergo
a systematic program of education that extends over
a period of 20 years. The officer corps of the services, which provides the senior military leadership,
presents the most obvious example of this aspect
of the American military profession.
Junior officers in the US Army, following a pattern found in all services, attend a basic course for
their branch (such as infantry, field artillery, or signal corps) where they learn fundamental skills,
leadership techniques, and small unit tactics. Following several years of service, each officer attends
a roughly 6-month course in preparation for command and more senior responsibilities.
Following further professional experience, at
about the 10- to 12-year point, selected field grade
officers spend a year at the Army Command and
General Staff College or its equivalent in one of the
other services. When they complete that level of
education, they have mastered to varying degrees
a highly specialized knowledge of military tactics,
support and sustainment operations, planning procedures, and operational requirements involving
the equipping and training of armed forces that will
enable them to function efficiently.
The last formal step in the education system of
all the services is attendance at a senior service college. After 16 to 20 years, officers selected on the
basis of merit in a highly competitive process spend
a year at the Army, Naval, Air Force, or National
140
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
War College (or, for some, the Industrial College of
the Armed Forces), where they concentrate on strategy and international relations. From the ranks of
war college attendees come the generals and admirals, the senior leadership of the American military.
In addition, under military programs, most officers receive a graduate degree from a civilian
school in a discipline related to the officer’s individual
career pattern. The end product of the military’s
educational system is a highly trained, well-educated officer who has developed a special expertise
and body of knowledge peculiar to his or her career in precisely the sense that the status of being a
professional requires. The objectives13(p31) of the educational process just described are identified as follows in one analysis of command responsibilities:
1.
Knowledge. Information, data, facts, theories,
concepts [includes military tactics, weapons
capabilities, and logistical requirements].
2.
Skills. Abilities that can be developed and
manifested in performance, not merely in
potential.…Includes technical, communications,
information-retrieval, and some analytical skills.
3.
Insights. Ideas and thoughts derived internally from an ability to see and understand
clearly the nature of things. Necessary part of
making judgments, of deciding, of “putting it
all together,” of “being aware” of wisdom, farsightedness.…Cannot be taught directly, but
can be induced by qualified teachers. Generally a product of education [and long experience] rather than training.
4.
Values. Convictions, fundamental beliefs,
standards governing the behavior of people.
Includes attitudes towards professional standards such as duty, integrity, loyalty, patriotism, public service, and phrases such as “take
care of your people” and “accomplish your
missions.”…Values, like insights, must be derived by the individual, if they are to have
meaning.
Thus a senior professional military officer is one
in whom the nation has made a major investment.
This officer has an expert knowledge of a complex
intellectual discipline that results only from extensive training and education, wide experience, and
long application. The commander of an aircraft carrier group or a similar naval command must understand the relationships between tactical alternatives
and organizational capabilities, the technological
abilities and limitations established by highly complex equipment, and the variety of interpersonal
skills necessary to motivate and command others.
The mastery of complex staff procedures and the
competent command of large military formations
require capabilities normally achieved only after
progression through years of professional preparation and experience.
Senior members of the military, if they are adequately prepared for command, will be proficient
in many areas. Nye believes that Miles captures this
requirement when he says that a capable military
strategist must be prepared to do each of the five
following tasks13(p136):
1.
Understand and support political goals, to
insure effective coordination of policy and
strategy.
2.
Select military objectives that will lead logically to the achievement of political aims.
3.
Allocate military resources and establish correct priorities.
4.
Conduct war in a way that sustains support
on the home front.
5.
Maintain a proportional balance between the
applications of violence and the value of the
political goals.
The American people continue to have a strong
interest in the nature of the professional officer
corps. Occasional failures in conduct and character
of military leaders causes great concern, if not
alarm, and public demands for corrective measures
invariably follow. Two considerations obviously at
work are the military’s role as the ultimate defenders of freedom and rights and the military’s responsibility for the lives and welfare of the sons and
daughters of America who serve in military organizations. Those considerations alone establish
competence in military duties as a moral imperative. 14 Incompetence can result in disaster for serving members of the military and danger to national
security. In view of such possibilities, the military’s
continuous concern about individual skills and performance and professional competence in general
follows logically. The military services’ extensive
systems of schooling and focus on professional development reflect such concern.
Corporateness
The functional imperatives give rise to complex
vocational institutions which mold the officer corps
into an autonomous social unit. Entrance into this
unit is restricted to those with the requisite education and training and is usually permitted only at
the lowest level of professional competence. The
corporate structure of the officer corps includes
not just the official bureaucracy but also societies,
associations, schools, journals, customs, and
traditions. 7(p16)
141
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
Corporateness involves characteristics that make
a group providing a specialized service to society a
distinctive and relatively autonomous entity. By
“autonomous” it is meant that the group establishes
its own criteria for entrance for candidates for membership, evaluates and judges the conduct and competence of those members, and imposes its own
sanctions for failures to meet the professional standards set by the group. Members of the group are
the only ones competent ultimately to judge the
professional abilities of individual officers. Officers can be judged in terms of the results they
achieve, just as medical doctors can be judged by
the success of their treatment of patients, but only
other doctors can judge the technical skill of a member of the medical profession. The officer corps is
also a self-regulating body that determines the standards of competence and conduct for its members.
Such internal standards constitute an important
aspect of corporateness.
Another facet of corporateness emerges from the
individual’s sense of identity with the institution
and its values, which will be discussed in more detail shortly, and from the feeling of obligation to
further the institution’s purposes. Individual members thus share responsibility for maintaining the
standards of the corporate group with respect to the
performance of other members, and a variety of
institutional procedures and mechanisms, as Huntington notes above, help safeguard and perpetuate the standards.
In addition to structural indications of corporateness, the military exhibits a strong sense of group
identity through the value of loyalty in the professional code. One sociologist describes military loyalty in these terms:
Loyalty is the quintessential military virtue: loyalty to the country, the Constitution, and the president as commander-in-chief … to the [military] itself and its standards and traditions; to the unit in
which a soldier serves, and to peers, superiors, and
subordinates. In theory the most important of these
loyalties is to the United States Constitution; in
practice the most important—to a soldier’s morale
and to his or her willingness to obey orders and
assume responsibility—is to comrades. 15(p54)
Loyalty strengthens the sense of identity with the
professional calling and the willingness to subordinate one’s own interests to the interests of the
institution and the client the institution serves. Both
developments enhance the corporate nature of the
activity.
The American Professional Military Ethic
The preceding discussion of loyalty leads directly
to the American PME, the core of professionalism
for members of the Army, the Air Force, the Navy,
the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard. In discussing the PME, it is first necessary to recognize that
there is no formally published code of ethics as such
for the American military or the individual services
(what is formally common to all is The Uniform Code
of Military Justice that establishes military law, which
admittedly governs behavior but in an exclusively
proscriptive legal fashion). The military services
nonetheless do have a set of standards of conduct
passed on through the education systems previously described and the process of professional socialization. In the view of one outside observer, it
appears that “loyalty to this code and to the people
with whom it is shared is the essential military
quality.”15(p43)
In considering loyalty to one’s superiors, many
turn to the classic statement in Shakespeare’s Henry
V. On the eve of the historic battle of Agincourt,
where the English under King Henry won an improbable victory, the disguised monarch walks
among his soldiers to assess their temper. Henry
prompts a supportive response by declaring, “Methinks I could not die anywhere so contented as in
the king’s company, his cause being just and his
quarrel honorable.” When one soldier rejects that
view by replying, “That’s more than we know,”
another describes the view long held to both justify and excuse the actions of soldiers necessary in
war: “Ay, or more than we should seek after, for we
know enough if we know we are the king’s subjects.
If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes
the crime of it out of us.”16(ll123–126) Because the information available to common soldiers has always been
so limited, the principle of superior orders holds
that so long as one is obeying the orders of one’s
superiors in the military chain of command, one
cannot be held accountable for those actions.
Recent history in the form of the Nuremberg Trials after World War II has developed this tenet further, as Chapter 8, Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War, will consider in some detail.
Published guidance today frequently repeats in
emphatic terms the requirement for members of the
military to refuse to obey illegal orders. The US
Army’s The Law of Land Warfare presents an uncompromising position on this point: “The fact that the
law of war has been violated pursuant to an order
of a superior authority, whether military or civil,
does not deprive the act in question of its character
142
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
as a war crime, nor does it constitute a defense in
the trial of an accused….”17(¶182)
 As I noted previously, the guidance—ethical
guidance as well as legal—for conduct of members
of the military has clearly been influenced by the
international laws of war. This point should be kept
in focus despite infamous events such as the March
16, 1968, My Lai massacre in Vietnam and the legal
aftermath that so vividly raised the issue of hypocrisy. Second Lieutenant Calley was in command of
an infantry platoon and, acting upon ambiguous
orders, ordered his men to kill every “man, woman,
and child” in the village of My Lai. Initially sentenced to life imprisonment in 1970 by a military
court martial for the murder of 33 Vietnamese civilians, Calley was released on parole in 1974. Despite his early release, it should be remembered that
his defense of following orders did not save him
from conviction. Furthermore, those found not
guilty of charges stemming from the massacre were
not acquitted on the basis of the “superior orders”
defense. (See Chapter 6, Honor, Combat Ethics, and
Military Culture, and Chapter 9, The Soldier and
Autonomy, for additional discussion of My Lai.)
The central place of loyalty in military values
suggested by the passage in Shakespeare nonetheless holds today. Each military service has published
what its leadership considers the most important
professional values:
• US Army Professional Values18–20
Loyalty
Duty
Respect
Selfless service
Honor
Integrity
Personal courage
• US Navy Core Values21
Honor
Commitment
Courage
• US Air Force Values22
Integrity
Service
Excellence
The Army values (LDRSHIP) have been depicted
in poster form (Figure 5-1) and are prominently displayed on Army installations worldwide. Loyalty,
which appears at the top of the US Army list, plays
a large part in the US Navy’s statement of commitment and the US Air Force’s statement of service
and patriotism. Honor (Figure 5-2) and integrity
Fig. 5-1. The “LDRSHIP” acronym devised by Army leaders helps soldiers remember the Army values, especially
in combat where they are most likely to be tested. These
are not listed in order of importance but rather as a way
to remember the component parts of leadership.
play prominent roles in all the service standards.
For the Army, an honorable soldier is one who lives
up to all the other Army values.
The elements of the code that guides the conduct
of all members of the American military can be clarified by reconsidering the formative influences that
were discussed earlier. The first and most ubiquitous of these is that set of functional requirements
arising directly from the nature of the activity. Courage, competence, and discipline (obedience) were
the foremost requirements identified in this category. Physical courage has of course been and will
remain the quintessential warrior virtue, but today
it is clearly recognized that men and women in uniform must also possess moral courage if they are to
meet the challenges of their profession. Today’s
military, deployed on peacekeeping operations and
short-notice missions with more powerful weapons
than ever before in the hands of more junior people
than ever before, faces stern demands on judgment
and character. Physical courage must be matched
by moral courage (Figure 5-3). After these functional
143
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
Fig. 5-2. The concept of “honor” as it is depicted in the
Army poster series on leadership. Although “honor” is
actually the summation of the other Army values, as indicated in the subtext of this poster, its inclusion in the
list helps emphasize its importance.
requirements, one must consider the legal requirements. Because military personnel are sworn to
uphold and defend the US Constitution, they are
constrained by Article 6, Clause 2 of that document,
which states that international treaties signed by the
United States become the law of the land. As The
Commander’s Handbook on the Law of Naval Operations
states, “Pursuant to the Constitution of the United
States, treaties to which the United States is a party
constitute a part of the supreme law of the land with
a force equal to that of laws enacted by Congress.”23
Among the treaties are the Hague Conventions, the
Geneva Conventions, and the rest of the international laws of war.
When an American serviceman or servicewoman
swears to uphold and defend the US Constitution,
he or she swears to uphold the international laws
of war. This second set of constraints on permissible conduct further delineates the ramifications
of commitment to the PME. The commitment to
uphold the laws of war logically entails commitment to the two previously cited humanitarian prinFig. 5-3. “Personal courage” is a combination of physical courage and moral courage, usually in the most difficult of situations. This illustration clearly gives the sense
of the danger of the unknown about to be discovered by
these soldiers and their leader. There is no doubt that it
has taken courage to get them into this position, and it
will take courage to carry them through it as well.
ciples underlying those laws of war (those principles
being that individual persons deserve respect as such,
and that human suffering ought to be minimized).
As noted previously, the fundamental values of
American society provide the third major formative influence on standards of military conduct.
Tension may arise at times between the requirements of military activity and fundamental social
values. When such conflicts occur in the American
system and society, in the American military culture, the fundamental values of society in the end
take precedence. They establish the final moral constraints on acceptable behavior by members of the
American military.
These three major influences that shape the contents of the PME provide no simple equation for
identifying permissible actions, even after the content of the PME has been specified. Recognizing the
nature and relationship of the influencing factors
merely provides a framework for considered judgment. The identification of such factors allows a
more convincing summary of the central tenets of
144
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
the American PME that have emerged from the interaction of these formative influences.
The effect of those ethical guidelines in practice,
however, cannot be captured completely in a listing. In his Philosophical Investigations, Wittgenstein
proposed a form of ordinary language analysis that
essentially claimed that the meaning of any sentence
or utterance could best be understood in terms of
the context in which it appeared rather than in terms
of syntactical analysis. 24 A parallel sense applies to
the values that constitute the American PME. They
are best understood in the context of military experience rather than in terms of logical analysis and
explanation. That may be one reason the process of
professional socialization, relying heavily on example and role modeling, remains by far the most
important means for perpetuating the military ethic.
Classroom and academic discussions may assist the
process of education and acculturation, but they
cannot replace the experience of military practice
as a means of inculcating values. That stipulation
should be kept in mind regarding the description
Fig. 5-4. “Loyalty” as it is depicted in the Army leadership poster series. Loyalty is a concept that has evoked
considerable discussion over the centuries in militaries
around the world. This poster stresses the official US
Army view that soldiers need to be loyal to the US Constitution, their service, and their fellow soldiers.
that follows.
The fundamental concepts that constitute the
core of the PME are those that have emerged in this
discussion. First and foremost, military officers
are expected to be loyal to their organization and
their country (Figure 5-4). During the Korean Conflict, under brutal duress, numerous American
POWs collaborated with the enemy or performed
actions demanded of them that were impermissible
under military regulations. American dismay at
such conduct by captured soldiers and determination to minimize future recurrences led President
Eisenhower to promulgate The Code of Conduct
(Figure 5-5) for Members of the Armed Forces of
the United States in Executive Order 10631, 17 August 1955. 25 Standards established in that document
grow out of the value of loyalty.
Another fundamental concept in the PME, selfless service (Figure 5-6), implicit in The Code of Conduct, follows necessarily from the ultimate liability
of combat: loss of life. The same principle applies
in many contexts in which the military institution
expects the individual to subordinate personal interests to the requirements of military duty. In paying tribute to the heroes of D day in World War II,
General Sullivan, then the Army Chief of Staff,
emphasized selfless service:
I think these soldiers—the Eisenhowers, the Summers, and the Pinders and all the rest whose names
are known only to buddies, loved ones, or God
alone—did their duties and made their sacrifices
for each other and for us. They epitomized the ethics of selfless service, the core value of American
soldiers and, indeed, everyone in the country’s
armed forces. 26(p26) [Emphasis added.]
Obedience that results from fear cannot be relied
upon in crisis situations when immediate dangers
overwhelm the threat of sanctions. The value of
obedience in the military context must follow from
commitment to the institution. Obedience in all circumstances relates directly to loyalty, selfless service, and the overarching emphasis on mission accomplishment (duty) (Figure 5-7). All three of those
values result from the functional requirements of
military service, just as do courage and integrity.
Courage needs no further elaboration. Unless subordinates can rely on the honesty and sincerity of
their leaders, components of integrity, trust will be
elusive. Without trust in the unit’s leadership, no
combat organization will be nearly as effective as
consistently successful performance in combat
requires. Without accuracy in reports from subordinate headquarters, no commander can make
145
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
Article 1
I am an American, fighting in the forces which guard
my country and our way of life. I am prepared to
give my life in their defense.
Article 2
I will never surrender of my own free will. If in
command, I will never surrender the members
of my command while they still have the means
to resist.
Article 3
If I am captured, I will continue to resist by all means available. I will make every effort to escape and to aid others to
escape. I will accept neither parole nor special favors from
the enemy.
THE CODE OF CONDUCT
Article 4
If I become a prisoner of war, I will keep faith with my
fellow prisoners. I will give no information or take
part in any action which might be harmful to my
comrades. If I am senior, I will take command.
If not, I will obey the lawful orders of those
appointed over me and will back them up in
every way.
Article 5
When questioned, should I become a prisoner of
war, I am required to give name, rank, service number, and date of birth. I will evade answering questions to
the utmost of my ability. I will make no oral or written statements disloyal to my country or its allies or harmful to their
cause.
Article 6
I will never forget that I am an American, fighting for freedom, responsible for my actions, and dedicated to the principles
which made my country free. I will trust in my God and in the United States of America.
Fig. 5-5. Code of Conduct for Members of the Armed
Forces of the United States. The original code was issued
through Executive Order 10631 on 17 August 1955 by
President Dwight D. Eisenhower, after it was realized that
coercive “brainwashing” could cause even the most patriotic soldiers to be induced to make statements against
their will. The code was amended through Executive
Order 12017 on 3 November 1977 by President Jimmy
Carter as a response to the USS Pueblo incident (in which
a naval vessel was captured and held by the North Koreans), as well as the overall Vietnam experience. The
change removed the suggestion of absolutes from Article
5, replacing “I am bound to give only ….” with “I am
required to give….” The code was amended again
through Executive Order 12633 on 28 March 1988 by
President Ronald Reagan, to make the articles gender
neutral. 53 Federal Register 10355 (1988).
Fig. 5-6. “Selfless service” is a vital part of US Army leadership values.
All soldiers know that at some time they may be called on to sacrifice
themselves for the sake of others or the sake of the mission. The inclusion of selfless service on this list of leadership values not only emphasizes its importance but also reaffirms the acknowledgment of the sacrifice that soldiers may have to make.
FPO
146
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
timely, informed decisions that will maximize opportunities for success in battle. The importance of
integrity (Figure 5-8) appears undeniable and
uncontroversial as well.
Military organizations have long recognized
commitment to the welfare of one’s fellows and
one’s subordinates as a practical benefit, a multiplier of combat effectiveness, but such commitment
also flows from respect for the integrity and the
fundamental rights of individual persons. In the
American military, the functional aspect of the value
of respect (Figure 5-9) receives strong reinforcement
from the core American social value of individualism. In American culture, the worth of the individual has shaped all primary social institutions.
The religious tradition that posits an immortal soul,
the idea of equality before the law, and the principle of protecting individual rights from the power
of the state each contribute to the value of individual soldiers that has become fundamental to the
American military culture. That tradition buttresses
Fig. 5-7. “Duty” as depicted in the US Army poster series on leadership applies to every soldier equally. The
concept is straightforward: fulfill obligations. There is
no need for further explanation. Soldiers must do their
duties, just as they must be willing to sacrifice themselves, as necessary, for mission accomplishment.
Fig. 5-8. “Integrity” is a concept that has been part of
militaries for centuries. This US Army poster, featuring
a composite picture of genders and races representative
of military service, helps convey the message that soldiers must do what they know to be right in all aspects
of their military lives.
the appreciation of initiative in the American soldier,
sailor, and airman. Initiative and independent action,
which superficially appear to be oxymoronic entries
in the expectations of a hierarchical, authoritarian
institution, actually have great practical value.
Ambrose highlights the value of initiative in his
examination of the Normandy invasion in 1944
when he emphasizes that in that time of crisis
Americans made better soldiers than the Germans:
The contrast between the American and British officers, from generals down to lieutenants and
NCOs, and their German counterparts could not
have been greater. The men fighting for democracy
were able to make quick, on-site decisions and act
on them; the men fighting for the totalitarian regime were not. 27(p17)
Whether or not one accepts Ambrose’s claim concerning the superior initiative of American soldiers,
which may overlook many counterexamples a critic
could cite, the importance of initiative in battle re147
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
Fig. 5-9. “Respect” is a central value for all militaries.
The US Army emphasizes that respect should flow in all
directions: leaders for their subordinates, subordinates
for their leaders, and peer to peer. This respect for others, reflecting the respect for self and abilities that comes
with effective training and discipline, is an important
component of leadership at all levels.
mains unquestionable, and it is certainly the case
that the enduring American social values of democracy and individualism distinctively shape the military culture and the military ethic for the armed
forces of the United States. The perspectives that
follow from honoring those values are conducive
to independent thought and initiative.
Developing initiative in military officers remains
an inexact behavioral science, of course, because of
the delicate balance involved. Janowitz refers to that
balance when he notes that “the development of a
rational approach to innovation cannot supplant an
uncritical willingness to face danger—the essence
of the martial spirit.”9(p35) He also asserts that “for
[leaders] the heroic traditions of fighting men,
which can only be preserved by military honor,
military tradition, and the military way of life, are
crucial.”9(p35) These characteristics all emphasize
conformity. Cultivating both conformity to institutional standards and initiative in action presents a
continuing challenge but one that the American
military has historically met. As sociologist Hays
observes concerning the development of military
virtues, the “purpose is to teach autonomy in the
context of structure, independence in the context
of tradition.”15(p4) (See Chapter 9, The Soldier and
Autonomy, for a further discussion of these issues.)
While insightful analysts will note that any specific articulation of the American PME will be problematic in view of the penumbra of values that constitute the ethic, the following seven guidelines capture the central features of the professional code and
the values of the separate services:
American military professionals
1.
accept service to country as their primary
duty and defense of the United States Constitution as their calling. They subordinate
their personal interests to the requirements
of their professional functions.
2.
conduct themselves at all times as persons
of honor whose integrity, loyalty, and courage are exemplary. Such qualities are essential on the battlefield if a military organization is to function effectively.
3.
develop and maintain the highest possible
level of professional knowledge and skill.
To do less is to fail to meet their obligations to the country, the profession, and
fellow warriors.
4.
take full responsibility for their actions and
orders.
5.
promote and safeguard, within the context
of mission accomplishment, the welfare of
their subordinates as persons, not merely
as soldiers, sailors, or airmen.
6.
conform strictly to the principle that subordinates the military to civilian authority.
They do not involve themselves or their
subordinates in domestic politics beyond
the exercise of basic civil rights.
7.
adhere to the laws of war and the regulations of their service in performing their
professional functions.
The promulgation of the values is the goal of an
aggressive campaign within the Army.
The laws of war will change over time, slowly,
and the core values of American society will evolve,
even more slowly, eventually bringing about
changes in the PME, but the central features of the
code identified here will guide the conduct of members of the American military profession for the
foreseeable future. The critical point to recognize is
148
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
that stable, enduring standards of conduct do exist.
The processes of professional socialization in all the
military services are designed to foster in the officer corps a deep commitment to professional values and to strengthen such values among all members of the armed forces. Americans can depend upon
the military institution to carry out its responsibilities largely because of the PME and the institutional
commitment to professional military values.
Pluralism and the Professional Military Ethic
Strong limitations on behavior, notably in the
form of a PME, a special group ethos, remain critical for military organizations for several reasons.
First, the activity places great stress on individuals. Either the people performing the activity must
exercise unusual self-discipline or the group must
provide that discipline. In the most effective
military organizations, both factors are present.
Military forces, after all, inflict death and destruction on an incredible scale. Many soldiers will recoil in horror, retreat into a mindless fear, or lose
control in some other fashion. Psychological support and a focus on commitments ameliorates such
effects and enables individuals to endure extraordinary hardships. Second, in any large nation, and
certainly in the United States, men and women join
the armed forces with widely varying backgrounds.
If values are those beliefs reflecting what persons
hold to be important to them, it can be said with
certainty that those joining the military will hold
widely varying values. To create and maintain an
effective military organization, the military leadership must institute a process of professional socialization that establishes some common attitudes and
commitments.
For the leadership of American military services,
the institutional commitment to the professional
military values remains a beacon guiding conduct
and policy decisions. In the process of professional
socialization, new members learn the importance
of loyalty, primarily to their unit and their peers;
the requirement for competence in assigned duties;
and the imperative of discipline. Everyone in command positions understands the necessity of soldiers’ abilities and obedience to orders if military
missions are to be carried out successfully. Unless
the men and women in subordinate positions share
that understanding, successful operations will be
unlikely at best.
As previously noted, most Americans share certain fundamental values. For Americans serving
their country as soldiers, sailors, and airmen, supporting and defending the US Constitution provides
the focus of their national service and a re-emphasis on the fundamental American social values of
freedom, equality, individualism, and democracy
that the US Constitution manifests. Such abstract
concepts play at most a distant role in the daily activities of members of the military, and although
such values seem more the stuff of Independence Day
speeches than conscious factors in decision making,
in problem cases they do structure the responses
appropriate from an institutional point of view.
Problem cases arise in part because Americans
do live in a decidedly pluralistic society and do not
share all the same values or accord values the same
importance. Even for those committed to the stated
institutional values, conflicts will arise, if not moral
dilemmas. Any discussion of military ethics must
consider the resolution of value conflicts. Two such
areas of conflict, the integration of women into military occupational specialties and homosexuals serving in the military, illustrate the ethical considerations that have been discussed in this chapter.
Women in the Military
The long history of military development that
was reviewed earlier revealed only supporting roles
for women, and minor supporting roles at that, up
until the 1970s. Why did that situation change? One
reason involved opportunity and equality. Besides
being a civic obligation and a fearsome challenge
in wartime, military service presents opportunity.
Furthermore, in a society holding equality as a fundamental value, women came to expect that they
would have the same opportunities as men in terms
of federal employment.
Military leaders resisted the pressure of public
and Congressional opinion because of a conflict
among values. Defense of rights constitutes one of
the primary purposes of the American military.
However, if women have the legal right to serve in
the military, how could military leaders rule against
them? For a considerable period, the uniformed
services raised the issue of duty and military effectiveness: Women in the armed forces, they claimed,
would degrade combat readiness and combat effectiveness, besides introducing unwanted administrative complications. After all, the military accepts
only those people who meet certain performancebased criteria. On the grounds of military effectiveness, for instance, the armed forces do not accept
for service those who suffer from serious health
149
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
problems or physical abnormalities. In today’s volunteer military, inductees must be physically capable and meet strict competency standards.
As soon as women gained sufficient political influence and established that their exclusion on the
grounds of effectiveness was unwarranted, however, the rules changed. Although women in the
military must still overcome prejudice in some
cases, women in the United States have become
valuable members of the serving military in other
than the traditional roles allowed women. Their
incorporation has proceeded deliberately, with careful consideration of combat readiness degradation.
The pace of integration has also been a function of
male attitudes changing very slowly. In the end,
nonetheless, it should be noted that the social values of opportunity and equality have dominated.
Concerns about the rights of individuals have
thus prevailed over limited utilitarian positions that
hold that government leaders should choose the
policy best serving combat readiness. Of course, a
more comprehensive argument about what is best
for society as a whole over the long term remains
problematic. The more comprehensive utilitarian
argument focusing on the overall good to society
might favor the integration of women into military
units as a long-term policy. Any decision based on
the results of integration will be determined on contingent, consequentialist grounds.
Today only a distinct minority question the value
of women in the military. The issue of concern to
many more is the question of whether women
should serve in combat. As one general reportedly
observed, “Women with rifles and fixed bayonets
in a forward position gives me heartburn.”28 Although he made that remark a number of years ago,
the attitude persists, perhaps more strongly in the
Army than in the other services. No existing law
prevents women in the Army from serving in combat roles, but Army policy does so, and public opinion has yet to register sufficient support to force the
US Army to allow women in combat roles.
Exclusion from direct combat roles certainly limits opportunities for advancement for military
women, to the extent that one may well question
the adequacy of measures instituted to provide
equal treatment for women. Traditionally the fast
track to promotion and advancement in a military
career has been through the command of combat
units, but women cannot command the close combat organizations in the armor, infantry, and field
artillery branches in the Army. Exclusion from these
positions inevitably limits career opportunities for
women in comparison to those for men.
If one sets aside concerns about seeing women
wounded or killed, as many have following the
American experience in the Persian Gulf in 1991,
and realistically considers strength requirements,
which some women can certainly meet, three issues
become prominent: the menstrual cycle, periodic
hormone imbalances, and pregnancy. Such influences on attitude and availability appear comparable to the kinds of administrative problems raised
by a number of other conditions appearing in both
men and women, ranging from migraine headaches
to caffeine addiction to drug abuse. To argue that
such factors justify a ban on women in combat roles
appears questionable at best.
In the past, those arguing against opening any
roles to women claimed that women too often become mothers whose responsibilities at home
would detract from the mother’s military performance, to include her availability. More frequently
in recent years, however, fathers, and sometimes
single-parent fathers, have been struggling with the
same kinds of problems. Parental roles cannot be
the basis for discrimination against women if the
discrimination cites effectiveness in the military
role. Contemporary American women quite justifiably expect equal rights and opportunities. For the
military leadership, overcoming the structural bias
against women in combat will require time and
persistent efforts at education.
The US Army, albeit moving more slowly toward
full integration of women than the other services,
continues in that direction. Discrimination continues to fade. Approximately 92% of the US Army
career fields were open to women as of 1 April
2000. 29 Only jobs requiring direct ground combat
remain on the exclusion list, and discussion continues concerning that limitation.
Homosexuals in the Military
Although the Clinton administration’s “don’t
ask, don’t tell” policy of 1994 concerning homosexuals temporarily deflected attention from the issue,
the military services continue to discharge (a civil
action) serving members who have either declared
themselves to be homosexual or were found to have
engaged in homosexual relations. Homosexual acts
are also subject to criminal punishment. Is such discrimination against homosexuals acceptable? Legal
precedent says yes. Ethical analysis provides a less
certain answer. The situation reveals the tensions
that exist between moral equality and the duty to
150
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
field the most effective fighting force possible.
For many years, American courts have upheld
the military’s special status concerning abridgment
of the rights of individual service members. The
special legal status of the military results from its
unique mission to provide for national security. Its
hierarchical nature and the requirement for immediate response to the authority of commanders have
long been recognized as functional necessities for
the successful accomplishment of that unique mission. A long list of court decisions in the United
States has upheld this status and the legality of
regulatory actions that follow from the functional
requirements of the military’s mission. 30–36 Burns v
Wilson,33 for instance, noted in 1953 that “the rights
of men in the armed forces must perforce be conditioned to meet certain overriding demands of discipline and duty.” The history of the special status
accorded the military in relation to giving weight
to institutional interests at the expense of individual
rights indicates why the military, in legal rulings,
has been granted considerable latitude concerning
homosexuals.
The further question that remains, however, after the legal issues are sorted out, troubles many.
They find it difficult to justify abridging the rights
of a particular minority in society, namely, members of the military, in the name of defending the
rights of individuals and the rights of the collective citizenry. In the process of indoctrination and
socialization, military trainees are subject to harsh
demands and severe psychological pressures. For
all members of the military, commanders routinely
curtail the right of free speech. People in the military may not form unions. Regulations severely
limit choice in their personal affairs, and if they disobey the instructions of their superiors, they can
be tried and imprisoned. Can such treatment be justified? The question applies directly to the treatment
of a further minority—members of the military
found to be homosexuals. Their personal lives become subject to intense investigation by their superiors, and they are also subject to procedurally
discriminatory treatment as a matter of policy. There
are several reasons for the military’s reaction.
Social controversy concerning the acceptability
of homosexual activity provides one obvious reason for discriminatory views. Besides long-standing social prejudices against homosexuals, at the
time the regulations were written the majority of
AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) cases
involved homosexuals. Some states (at the time of
publication, California, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin,
and the District of Columbia) have prohibited discrimination against homosexuals. In others such as
Texas, homosexual activities violate the law, and
participants are subject to legal prosecution. But does
this variety of opinion concerning homosexuality
justify the peremptory treatment of homosexuals
that is found in the military? In American society
today, in cases of unequal treatment or discrimination by institutions, advocates must justify such
treatment.
The legal precedents I have noted demonstrate
that in the American legal context, military authorities will be granted wide discretionary powers in
regulating the activities of individual soldiers so
long as such regulation appears necessary for the
preservation of order and discipline within the military institution. Private corporations could hardly
justify the harsh treatment of recruits that is found
in the military, if for some reason corporate activities appeared to dictate such preparation, but the
requirement to prepare soldiers physically and psychologically for the trauma of combat justifies
much. Proper preparation provides the best chance
of survival, without even considering combat effectiveness. Nonetheless, the military accepts a general constraint on its regulatory efforts. The fundamental moral rights, not of soldiers as such, but of
persons constitute that constraint. Those moral
rights find expression in the broad principles stated
above; thus, soldiers have a right for their autonomy
to be restricted no more than necessary for the accomplishment of legitimate military purposes (legitimate implies both entailed necessity in a chain
of instrumental steps and moral coherence and consistency in terms of the moral ends for which the
institution exists), and they have a right to equal
treatment by military authorities.
For many years, homosexual acts by members of
the American armed forces have been straightforwardly illegal. The military views homosexual acts
as unacceptable, “contrary to good order and
discipline.” Sodomy is an offense under The Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). Furthermore,
for officers the UCMJ proscribes homosexual behavior as “conduct unbecoming an officer and a
gentleman.”37(Art134) As also noted previously, the
military services discharge declared homosexuals
under administrative provisions when no homosexual activity is involved. As AR600-20 makes
clear, a basis for discharge exists if (1) the soldier
has engaged in a homosexual act, (2) the soldier has
said that he or she is a homosexual or bisexual, or
made some other statement that indicates a propen151
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
sity or intent to engage in homosexual acts, or (3)
the soldier has married or attempted to marry a
person of the same sex. 38(¶4. 19d,[2b])
With respect to a variety of severe measures that
restrict individual autonomy, to include discrimination against homosexuals, the courts have long
considered the situation of the military to be a special case under law. The Supreme Court’s decision
in Parker v Levy, 1974,39 recognized that the military
is a separate society that has a clear set of social norms
both well-established and peculiar to it, as well as
its own criminal code and its own court systems.
The Court noted in Parker that “while military personnel are not excluded from First Amendment protection, the fundamental necessity for obedience,
and the consequent necessity for discipline, may
render permissible within the military that which
would be constitutionally impermissible outside it.”
Discrimination against homosexuals thus becomes a matter of competing moral obligations.
How should one resolve such conflicts? Which constitutes the most important consideration—the
damage done to competing moral obligations or the
recognized good that would result from eliminating a policy of discrimination against homosexuality? To answer such questions, one must turn to the
competing moral obligations and the practical issues involved.
In American society, the moral demand that
people should have equal freedom to express their
own personality as they choose is accepted. In
myriad ways, America has institutionalized the fundamental social values discussed earlier: freedom,
equality, individualism, and democracy. Each of
these four core values can be traced to the fundamental demand for the protection of autonomy,
which has generated two guiding principles that
constrain the actions of both individuals and the
government in American society: individual rights
deserve respect, and all persons deserve equal treatment unless there are compelling reasons to treat
them unequally. The mechanism of rights, both legal and moral, with the former being founded upon
the latter, has been the primary instrument in the
process of institutionalizing the core values.
Because rights inevitably conflict, however, and
because the security of the nation takes second to
few other concerns, autonomy is sometimes circumscribed. In this conflict one encounters controversy,
a lack of social consensus, and special difficulty
when practical affairs require action.
Practical requirements and ethical principles appear to oppose each other in some aspects of professional activities. All members of the military, and
especially military leaders, have a strong obligation
to support and defend the US Constitution. Perhaps
the most basic responsibility in that regard is to be
prepared to use force effectively to defend vital
national interests. Here the abstract principle of
autonomy confronts the obligation to make the
armed forces as effective as possible. Does the issue of homosexuality impinge on that effectiveness?
The most common factors cited in this regard are
unit cohesion, healthcare costs, and risks to the general military population.
Unit cohesion begins at the squad and team level.
The relationships forged in combat units among
young males have long been acknowledged as the
most important ingredient in fighting power. Combat effectiveness suffers most greatly when small
unit cohesion is lost. What effect will the presence
of known homosexuals in combat units have? The
answer at present is that it is not known, but within
the military leadership the consensus holds that
admitting homosexuals represents a serious threat
to cohesion. In view of their moral commitment to
readiness and mission preparedness, to duty in a
broad sense, military leaders who believe homosexual admission represents a threat to essential
military capabilities must oppose such a move insofar as they can appropriately do so. They cannot
responsibly advocate undermining the most important element in making American forces effective.
The prevalence of AIDS remains highest among
the homosexual community. Though numbers are
changing, that fact remains. The expense of treating AIDS patients represents a potentially crippling
healthcare cost at a time of declining military resources. Should the military expose itself to such
additional costs? In view of its responsibility for
readiness, should it do so? AIDS remains primarily
a disease of males (as of 2000, 83% of the cumulative total of AIDS patients in the United States were
adolescent or adult males). 40 Over 60% of the cumulative total of those infected fall in the 20- to 39year-old age group, the most important segment of
the population for military recruitment and manning. 40 Although the actual number of soldiers who
“seroconvert” has been declining since 1991, of the
cumulative total of those infected, 94% have been
male, the gender tasked with combat. 41
Even critics would agree that significant numbers of military members with AIDS would threaten
the general military population and thus military
readiness. Furthermore, those infected would themselves be put at risk by overseas deployments. In
152
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
addition, the drain on medical resources that would
result from treatment for a large number of AIDS
patients would undermine the capability of the military to maintain the health of active duty members
in general. AIDS patients suffer from “multi-organ
system disease,” including neurological involvement in the later stages, as well as severe psychological pressures, to include the fear of death and
social stigma. As a result, medical treatment requires considerably more resources and personnel
than do most diseases. The military services have
adopted policies towards those with AIDS that are
quite similar to existing military medical policies
for other debilitating or terminal diseases. Looked at
from that perspective, the policies appear justifiable.
Decisions concerning the policy of discriminating against homosexuals by discharging those in the
military who reveal themselves as homosexuals
become a matter of weighing the risks introduced
by homosexuals in the military against the undeniable evils of discrimination in terms of the principles of equality and individual rights. Before the
national leadership makes further decisions in this
matter, it must evaluate carefully the competing
moral issues. Central concerns include the questions
of how one sorts out the empirical issues and at
what point does one conclude that the recognition
of rights of a specific subset of society should no
longer be subordinate to security considerations.
Moral Dilemmas of Leadership: Case Study
Questions about women and homosexuals in the
military involve applying the PME to policy issues.
Of at least equal concern is the matter of applying
the PME to operational decisions men and women
in the military must make. The process of applying
the PME to a moral dilemma, a situation in which
all available alternatives necessitate violation of
some moral guideline, will conclude the discussion
in this chapter. Unfortunately, members of the
armed services sometimes face such situations.
The Situation
Colonel (COL) Gray commands the only armor brigade
in US forces deployed in a small Middle Eastern country,
Irabat. Forces of Sindonia, a hostile state to the north,
invaded Irabat 3 days ago, sweeping south across the
border and achieving complete surprise. American forces
were held in reserve until 8 hours after the invasion, when
their positions were attacked by two enemy divisions. For
the next 2 hours, US forces conducted a delaying action
on the north side of the Khyler River as they tried to stem
the rout of Irabati units that threatens the Irabati capital
just 30 miles to the south. For all involved, the Khyler
River, a major tributary more than half a mile across, has
become critical.
The United Nations has condemned the invasion of
Irabat, and forces from other NATO (North Atlantic Treaty
Organization) countries as well as US reinforcements are
preparing for movement. If the Sindonian forces can get
across the Khyler, they can drive south rapidly and conquer Irabat before help arrives.
COL Gray is attempting to move his units across a highway bridge on the river, the only one for many miles east
and west. The bridge has been prepared for demolition,
and he has orders to blow the bridge as soon as his forces
are across. Both the Irabati high command and COL
Gray’s superiors have made clear that the bridge must
be blown so that the enemy will be halted long enough to
reorganize Irabat’s forces in defense of the capital. In addition, the US commander has emphasized that COL Gray
must preserve his tanks for the battle south of the river if
the allied force is to have a prayer of succeeding.
When the last two tank battalions tried to reach the
long, narrow bridge, they found that the refugee flood fleeing the invaders had become uncontrollable. Masses of
men, women, and children block the bridge and the approaches to it. Horns, loudspeakers, even machine-gun
fire over the heads of the panicked crowds have made
no impression. COL Gray has concluded that any attempt
to block the flow of refugees on the approaches to the
bridge will result in a fight between his soldiers and the
desperate civilians. Sindonian forces are in sight on the
horizon, pressing south toward the crossing site.
COL Gray, knowing he has to get his tanks across and
blow the bridge, sees his options as limited. He can set
up defensive positions on the north side of the bridge and
try to hold the enemy at bay. Doing so will risk seizure of
the bridge unless he blows it up, but without the bridge
his holding force will be abandoned to the enemy. He
knows his tanks undoubtedly are critical to further defensive efforts south of the bridge. If the bridge were clear,
he might have a chance to withdraw rapidly across the
bridge after defending and still save some of his tanks,
though they would be easy targets on the long bridge
span. He can see, however, that civilians will clog the
bridge for some time to come. He can order his units to
drive into the packed masses of people. If they do so,
many civilians will die. As soon as the tanks are across,
he apparently must order the engineers to blow the bridge,
even if it is still crowded with refugees.
Mission requirements leave no doubt about the importance of getting the tanks across the bridge and preventing the passage of the enemy. COL Gray has called his
division commander, who, in response to a description of
the problem, tells COL Gray only that he must get his
tanks across and he must slow the enemy advance by
destroying the bridge. Beyond that, he tells COL Gray,
“Call the shots the way you see them. You’re the man on
the spot.”
153
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
The Analysis
Besides the fact that directly harming noncombatants would violate the laws of war, COL Gray
recognizes that US forces are in Irabat to defend and
protect the people of that country. To kill them in
the process appears patently contradictory. He cannot accept the alternative of directing his armor
units literally to drive over the fleeing refugees. He
knows, nonetheless, that he must slow the oncoming enemy forces if he is to accomplish his mission
and serve the larger interests of both the United
States and Irabat.
COL Gray also feels a strong loyalty to and a deep
responsibility for his men. To abandon some of them
on the north side of the river appears unacceptable
in terms of that responsibility, besides the fact that
he needs all his forces for further operations. He
sees two irreconcilable moral obligations: doing
what is necessary to accomplish a vital military
mission and protecting the lives of the innocent. He
apparently cannot do both. If he accomplishes his
mission, he must sacrifice civilian lives. If he refrains from injuring civilians, he fails in his mission, jeopardizing not only his own men but the
chances of successfully defending the country.
Many more civilian lives may be at risk if the enemy forces sweep south, not to mention the American and Irabati military units. In one sense, COL
Gray must decide whether the ends justify the
means: whether the end of defending the country
justifies sacrificing civilian lives.
Focusing on duty can help clarify the alternatives
in this situation. Duty requires adherence to the requirements of the PME, which demands adherence
to the laws of war, under which soldiers cannot inflict direct, intentional injury on noncombatants.
Duty also requires that the mission be accomplished,
even at the cost of the lives of one’s soldiers and
one’s own life. Soldiers do not have a right not to
be killed; noncombatants do. When situations involve a choice of risk to soldiers or a risk to noncombatants, soldiers must accept increased risk
before subjecting noncombatants to harm. How
much risk, unfortunately, cannot be established by
a simple formula.
In the Irabati situation, nonetheless, COL Gray
must choose a course of action that will satisfy competing requirements to the greatest extent possible.
One defensible solution would be to leave one battalion on the north side of the river to hold the enemy as long as possible. A defensive stand should
allow time for the other battalion to ease its way
into the refugee flow and get across the river. When
the capability to blow the bridge becomes endangered, COL Gray must give the order to destroy it,
even if civilian lives are endangered.
Such a decision would meet the conditions of
a just war version of double effect, which Paul
Christopher claims “the United States seems to have
adopted … so that one may undertake military
operations aimed at legitimate objectives or targets
even though the operations will also have foreseeable ‘bad’ consequences.”42(p102) He goes on to
note the four conditions necessary for double effect to justify an action: “(1) The bad effect is unintended; (2) the bad effect is proportional to the desired military objective; (3) the bad effect is not a
direct means to the good effect …; and (4) actions
are taken to minimize the foreseeable bad effects
even if it means accepting an increased risk to
combatants.”42(p102)
All the conditions of double effect appear to be
met if COL Gray chooses to defend the north side
of the river and wait until the last moment before
blowing the bridge. He certainly will not intend to
kill and injure civilians, though he foresees that result. The military situation is such that the good
effect, blocking the enemy advance and giving
American and Irabati forces a chance to defeat the
invading Sindonians, is indeed proportional to the
loss of civilian life on the bridge. Civilian casualties certainly do not provide the means to accomplish COL Gray’s mission; they are a foreseeable
but undesired result. And in defending the north
side of the bridge as long as he can, COL Gray does
accept increased risk to his own forces.
If the principle of double effect can withstand
moral analysis, as many believe it can, COL Gray
would appear to have made a defensible decision
if he acts as described. No easy formula or set of
rules presents a clear, uncontroversial answer to
the question of what action COL Gray ought to take
in these difficult circumstances, but application
of the PME and the broader values of the US
Constitution provide a framework for evaluation
both before and after the fact. In the end, COL
Gray and others in similar situations must act so
as to correct most effectively the wrong created
by the enemy invasion while honoring the principle of noncombatant immunity and the PME to
the greatest extent possible. In this case, the actions of defending the bridge with a portion of his
force and then blowing the bridge, whoever is on
it, seem to satisfy those criteria better than any
available alternative.
154
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Lieutenant Stone Revisited: Can His Dilemma
Be Resolved?
It is now time to return to Lieutenant Stone’s situation. Recall that he must take action. Three of his
soldiers have been captured and probably face brutal treatment by the enemy. An enemy prisoner in
Stone’s custody apparently knows where the American prisoners are, knowledge that would give Stone
a chance to rescue them before he must leave the area
entirely—and thus abandon them to their fate. But the
enemy prisoner refuses to divulge the information.
The first step is to determine the facts of the case
and then to recognize the legal considerations.
There is one stark fact: Torturing the prisoner is
specifically prohibited by regulations that reflect the
international laws of war. The Law of Land Warfare, US
Army Field Manual (FM) 27-10, states, “[P]risoners
of war must at all times be protected, particularly
against acts of violence or intimidation…”17(¶89) Lieutenant Stone has sworn to obey the legal orders of
his superiors and to uphold the US Constitution.
On both counts, torture is prohibited, for US Army
regulations constitute the legal orders of superiors
and the US Constitution requires adherence to the
international laws of war ratified by the US Congress. These include the Geneva Conventions of
1949 concerning the treatment of prisoners of war,
which are presented in FM 27-10. In addition, a
foray forward into enemy territory would hardly
be consistent with the apparent intent of Lieutenant Stone’s commanders who have ordered him to
withdraw.
However, Stone has an obligation to care for his
subordinates. Beyond that solemn obligation of
command, taking steps to free the American prisoners will strengthen the morale and resolve of his
unit, barring some disastrous development during
the rescue mission. Stone’s platoon will recognize
that the leadership will do everything possible to
take care of the members of the unit, which in turn
will strengthen cohesion and motivation to carry
out assigned missions. Further, Stone recognizes
that leaving the POWs in enemy hands probably
means abandoning them to their deaths.
In opposition, apparently, are the demands of
loyalty to one’s men and one’s unit, on one hand,
and adherence to the demands of military justice
and international law, on the other. In this case, torture is unacceptable under the institutional guidance provided by the US military. Stone can mount
a rescue attempt, he can further interrogate the prisoner, and he can even try to bargain with the prisoner—but he cannot torture him, just as he cannot
murder him. Commanders, by law, may need to do,
or refrain from doing, many things that they, as well
as their subordinates, dislike. If he decides to put
pressure on the prisoner to induce him to provide
information, Lieutenant Stone must recognize that
he is not doing so as a result of any official sanction
nor as a defensible result of a casuistic application
of the American PME.
CONCLUSION
Discussions in this chapter should at least make
clear that while moral guidelines for members of the
armed forces can be identified, explained, and justified, it is not possible to make all moral decisions
straightforward. Even though the “rules” in the POW
case are clear, what a specific leader would do in such
a difficult situation, and what should be excused,
should the prohibitions concerning the mistreatment
of prisoners be violated, remain difficult questions.
The moral landscape of the soldier has always
been difficult, perhaps more so now than ever before when the ramifications of decisions made
by both political and military leaders on the international stage are considered. Of the contemporary
world, Keegan observes, “Politics must continue;
war cannot. The world community needs, more
than it has ever done, skillful and disciplined warriors who are ready to put themselves at the service
of its authority. Such warriors must properly be seen
as the protectors of civilization, not its enemies.”1(p391)
The experiences of United Nations’ forces beginning
in 1990 strongly emphasized the expanding role of
peacekeeping and peacemaking operations, as well
as the difficulties of such undertakings. Keegan’s
observation appears especially applicable today,
highlighting as it does not only the important role
of the profession of arms but also the military ethics under which it functions.
155
The Profession of Arms and the Officer Corps
REFERENCES
1.
Dyer G. War. New York: Crown; 1985.
2.
Gelven M. War and Existence: A Philosophical Inquiry. University Park, Pa: Pennsylvania State University Press;
1994.
3.
Vayda AP. Hypotheses about functions of war. Nat Hist. 1967;76(10):48–50.
4.
Keegan J. A History of Warfare. New York: Alfred A Knopf; 1993.
5.
Divale WT. Warfare in Primitive Societies: A Bibliography. Rev ed. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-Clio; 1973. Quoted
by: Keegan J. A History of Warfare. New York: Alfred A Knopf; 1993.
6.
Hackett JW. The Profession of Arms. New York: Macmillan; 1983.
7.
Huntington SP. The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations. New York: Vintage
Books; 1964.
8.
Thompson J. The Lifeblood of War: Logistics in Armed Conflict. London: Brasseys; 1991: 38. Quoted by: Keegan J.
A History of Warfare. New York: Alfred A Knopf; 1993.
9.
Janowitz M. The Professional Soldier, A Social and Political Portrait. Glencoe, Ill: Free Press; 1960.
10.
Barber B. Some problems in the sociology of the professions. In: Lynn KS, ed. The Professions in America. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin; 1965: 15–34.
11.
Hartle AE. Moral Issues in Military Decision Making. Lawrence, Kan: University Press of Kansas; 1989.
12.
Matthews LJ. Is the military profession legitimate? Army. 1994;44(1):16.
13.
Nye RH. The Challenge of Command: Reading for Military Excellence. Wayne, NJ: Avery; 1986.
14.
Sorley LS III. Competence as an ethical imperative. Army. 1982;34(8):42–48.
15.
Hays K. Practicing Virtues: Moral Traditions at Quaker and Military Boarding Schools. Berkeley: University of California Press; 1994.
16.
Shakespeare, William. The Life of King Henry the Fifth. Act 4, scene 1.
17.
US Department of the Army. The Law of Land Warfare. Washington, DC: DA; 1956. Field Manual 27-10.
18.
Naylor SD. Core of the matter: Army defines ethics in seven central values. Army Times. December 16, 1996:3.
19.
US Department of the Army. Army Values. Washington, DC: DA Message. 17 February 1998.
Acknowledgment
The case study concerning Lieutenant Stone that opens this chapter is loosely based on one presented by Charles Ogletree in “Under Orders, Under Fire,” part of the Columbia University videotape series, Ethics in America, 1989.
Many of the points in the discussion of homosexuals in the military reflect material in Hartle AE,
Christopher PP. AIDS victims and military service. In: Biomedical Ethics Review 1992. Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press; 1993: 31–50.
156
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
20.
US Department of the Army. Army Leadership. Washington, DC: DA; August 1999. Field Manual 22-100.
21.
US Department of the Navy. NAVNEWS 054/92, NNS212 (citing NAVOP 030-92). CNO outlines core values of
the United States Navy. Navy News Service. 29 October 1992.
22.
Wakin MM. Professional Integrity. The Alice McDermott Memorial Lecture in Applied Ethics, Lecture 6. Colorado Springs, Colo: US Air Force Academy; 3 April 1996: 16.
23.
US Department of the Navy. The Commander’s Handbook on the Law of Naval Operations. Washington, DC: DN;
July 1987. NWP 9, 6-1.
24.
Finch HLR. Wittgenstein—The Later Philosophy: An Exposition of the Philosophical Investigations. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press; 1977: 23–26, 90–94.
25.
US Department of Defense. The US Fighting Man’s Code. Washington, DC: DoD; 6 August 1959. DoD Pamphlet
1-16.
26.
Sullivan GR. D-day plus fifty years. Army. 1994;44(6):20–27.
27.
Ambrose SE. Why we won the war: The politics of WW II. Army. 1994;44(6):12–19.
28.
Underwood L. Women in Combat. Unpublished paper distributed by Women’s Equity Action League, Washington, DC, 1979.
29.
Randy Newman, Chief, Classification and Structure Branch, DCSOPS, PERSCOM, US Army, 2461 Eisenhower
Avenue, Alexandria, Va. Personal Communication, 27 November 2000.
30.
 In re Grimley, 137 US. (1890).
31.
Schenck v United States, 249 US. (1919).
32.
Dennis v United States, 341 US. (1951).
33.
Burns v Wilson, 346 US. 137, 140 (1953).
34.
Orloff v Willoughby, 345 US. (1953).
35.
United States ex rel. Toth v Quarles, 35 US. (1955).
36.
United States v Priest, 21 USCMA 564, 45 CMR 338 (1972).
37.
Department of Defense. Uniform Code of Military Justice. Washington, DC: DoD; 2000.
38.
US Department of the Army. Enlisted Personnel. Washington, DC: DA; 15 January 1985. Army Regulation 635200.
39.
Parker v Levy, 417 US 733 (1974).
40.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Divisions of HIV/AIDS Prevention. Basic statistics—cumulative
cases. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/stats/cumulati.htm. Accessed 27 August 2000.
41.
Phil Renzullo, MD. US Military HIV Research Program. Rockville, Md. Personal Communication, 29 November 2000.
42.
Christopher PP. The Ethics of War and Peace: An Introduction to Legal and Moral Issues. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall; 1994.
