251
The Soldier and Autonomy
Chapter 9
THE SOLDIER AND AUTONOMY
SANDRA L. VISSER, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
PRINCIPLES OF AUTONOMY
The Harm Principle
The Legal-Moral Principle
The Principle of Paternalism
THE HARM PRINCIPLE AND THE MILITARY MISSION
INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY VS THE NEEDS OF THE ARMY
Conscientious Objection
Following Orders
CONCLUSION
*Associate Professor of Philosophy, Department of Philosophy, Valparaiso University, Valparaiso, Indiana 46383; formerly, Assistant Professor of Philosophy, Department of English, United States Military Academy, West Point, New York
252
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
SFC Peter G. Varisano
On Guard at Sunset
Saudi Arabia, 1991
Sergeant Varisano was part of an art team called upon to document Operation Desert Shield in the Persian Gulf War.
This watercolor, depicting the loneliness and responsibility of guard duty, also depicts all soldiers who, by virtue of
being soldiers, set aside their individual autonomy for this period to be part of the team and the mission. Image
available at: http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/art/display2.htm.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
253
The Soldier and Autonomy
INTRODUCTION
Frank wakes up and puts on the clothes he’s been
told to wear. He eats breakfast and leaves his
designated house. He was assigned to live in
a neighborhood where others of his station in life
live. All the houses are nearly identical with nicely
kept lawns. His “area coordinator” tells him he must
keep his yard tidy, which he does lest the area coordinator complain to Frank’s boss. Frank drives
to work, carefully observing the speed limit because
the police will tell his boss if he frequently gets
caught speeding. He wishes he could wear whatever clothes he wants, drive his car how he wants
without getting fired, and live where he wants.
Frank also doesn’t like the leader of his country very
much, but he cannot demonstrate or go to political
rallies in his work clothes. Frank can vote for someone else, but he cannot make public statements
about his disagreements with his country’s current
leader. If he makes such statements too publicly, he
will get in trouble with his boss. Frank believes so
much in personal liberty and freedom that he has
dedicated his life to ensure that everyone in his
country can have many of the freedoms he lacks.
Frank is in the US Army. Strangely enough, he
doesn’t have many of the freedoms he is willing to
fight for. The Army, purportedly by necessity, is
a nondemocratic, absolutist system designed to
defend democracy. Does the Army legitimately
take away so many personal freedoms? If so,
why?
In a country in which personal liberty is highly
valued, soldiers’ (in this chapter soldier refers to
both officers and enlisted personnel) losses of personal autonomy are marked and frequently give rise
to personal conflicts. This chapter will examine personal autonomy, its limits in a democratic society, and
its limits in the military of a democratic society.
For the purposes of this discussion, personal autonomy will be understood as the freedom to choose
among several courses of action without fear of coercion or other controlling interference. Champions
of autonomy, as most Americans are, generally
value its free exercise for two reasons. The first reason lies in human nature, specifically human rationality. Humans have the ability to make decisions
about courses of action based on their goals and
desires and their anticipation of the results of various potential courses of action. This is an ability
few other animals have and it should be highly valued. Thus, humans ought to be able to use it. John
Stuart Mill most clearly articulated the second reason for valuing autonomy. Exercise of autonomy of
action and speech is beneficial for society—it promotes creativity, individuality, and individual
growth, which have long-term beneficial effects for
society as a whole.
PRINCIPLES OF AUTONOMY
Though free exercise of personal autonomy (or
liberty) is a central value in democratic nations, it
must sometimes be restricted. Restrictions tend to
be justified based on one of three principles: (1) the
harm principle, (2) the legal-moral principle, and
(3) the principle of paternalism.
The Harm Principle
The harm principle, espoused by John Stuart
Mill, is the least restrictive of the three. It says that
one’s personal autonomy should only be limited in
order to prevent harm to others. In Mill’s words:
[T]he sole end for which mankind are warranted,
individually or collectively, in interfering with the
liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection.… [T]he only purpose for which power can
be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent
harm to others. 1
Mill goes on to assert that in the case of injury to
others, society has an obligation to prevent, stop,
and punish harm to others. An action is harmful to
another if it affects him in such a way as to restrict
his freedom without his free, informed, undeceived
consent. Examples of such restrictions of freedom
include physical harm to others, breaking of contracts, and stealing property.
Two more specific examples of how the harm
principle works might be helpful here. The United
States Military Academy (USMA) requires its male
plebes (freshmen) to take boxing. Frequently, boxers hurt their opponents. Such physical harm,
though it does restrict the freedom of the injured
party, does not take place without his free, undeceived consent. Before cadets get to the Academy,
they know that they must take boxing. Because they
are free to leave without penalty in their first year,
they implicitly consent to take boxing, and risk
whatever physical injury may result. Thus, though
254
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
boxers frequently hurt each other, such activities
need not be stopped according to the harm principle.
One of the many unique practices at USMA will
serve as a second example of how the harm principle works in a specific context. Because there is
an expectation that cadets are honest, borrowing is
a common practice at the Academy. Historically,
cadets have been allowed to borrow items from
another cadet without the latter’s knowledge. Most
of the time, cadets remembered to return the items
in a timely fashion, so such borrowing was unregulated. However, over the years, it became clear that
not all borrowing, even true instances of it, proved
harmless to the one being borrowed from. Frequently a cadet would borrow a book or cassette
tape fully intending to return it. Being human, the
borrower would occasionally forget to return the
item. The person from whom the item was borrowed could not find it when he wanted or needed
it. Thus, in order to prevent the harm that was occurring, Academy officials instituted a policy requiring borrowers to leave a note indicating which
items they borrowed and when they took them.
Though instituting such a policy restricts the freedom of the borrower in some way, the restriction is
justified because of the harm done to someone
whose items are unavailable to him when he needs
or wishes to use them.
A similar issue arises in the civilian world. In
many small towns teenagers enjoy skateboarding
and rollerblading down handrails. They wax them
so that they can go faster. Being young and ablebodied, they frequently fail to realize that waxing
the rails makes them unhelpful for people who need
them for support. Thus, in order to prevent damage to public property and prevent the harm caused
to those who cannot use the waxy, damaged rails,
towns prohibit waxing and skateboarding or rollerblading on public handrails.
The harm principle entails that actions that
cause harm might depend on one’s freely chosen
profession or occupation. The duties one incurs as
a result of becoming a soldier might limit one’s
freedom in certain respects, but it might broaden
it in others. The typical citizen should not lie in wait
in order to kill another human, though a soldier
might be required to do so during a time of war.
An accountant might be able to do his job well
despite being grossly overweight, but an infantryman cannot. Thus, an accountant is free to be
fat, because he alone suffers any ill effects, but
an infantryman violates another’s liberty by being
grossly overweight. He harms those who legitimately depend on him to perform his job well.
This principle allows people to practice even
those activities that others deem immoral, as long
as they do not harm others. It is the least restrictive of the three.
The Legal-Moral Principle
A more restrictive principle is the principle of
legal moralism. According to this principle, one is
justified in limiting another’s freedom if that person is performing or is planning to perform an
immoral action. Assume that illicit drug use is
immoral. If it is, it is the reason that justifies governments making all drug use of certain types illegal. For example, under the harm principle cocaine
use would be permissible as long as the user did
not violate any of his obligations as a result. He
could be punished only if he turned to a life of
crime, drove while under the influence of cocaine, beat his children, or brought about some
harm to others as a result. Then, he would only
be punished for the harmful actions he committed as a result, not for using the drug. However,
under the more restrictive principle of legal moralism, he could be punished or prevented from
using cocaine in the first place, because cocaine
use, in itself, is immoral.
The problem with this principle, and one reason
many people reject it, is its close relationship with
morality. People’s views of morality are notoriously
diverse—some believe that working on Sunday is
immoral, others think that working on Saturday is
immoral, still others believe that which days one
works has nothing to do with morality. Though
there is some objective standard of morality, people
are generally loath to give the government, even
one democratically run, the say in deciding where
the moral boundaries lie.
The Principle of Paternalism
The final principle is the principle of paternalism. It comes in various forms, but essentially states
that one may restrict the freedom of another if it is
for his own good and is in his long-term best interests. Mill strongly opposes a paternalistic principle.
His own good, either physical or moral, is not a
sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for
him to do so, because it will make him happier,
because in the opinion of others, to do so would be
255
The Soldier and Autonomy
wise, or even right. These are good reasons for remonstrating with him, or reasoning with him, or
persuading him, or entreating him, but not for compelling him, or visiting him with any evil in case
he do otherwise. To justify that, the conduct from
which it is desired to deter him must be calculated
to produce evil to someone else. The only part of
the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to
society, is that which concerns others. In the part
which merely concerns himself, his independence
is of right, absolute. 1
Paternalistic interference into someone’s life,
even when the interference comes with the best intentions, should never occur, according to Mill.
People are better off if they can exercise their freedom and learn from both their successes and failures as long as they only harm themselves with their
actions.
The military, and especially the United States
Military Academy (USMA), engages in many practices that appear paternalistic. Sometimes rules that
the military enforces look like they are merely for
the good of the soldier, but the military really has a
legitimate interest in having the soldiers act in the
regulated way. Other times, however, the rules are
purely paternalistic, no matter how one considers
it. A good example of this is a rule that is periodically enforced at USMA. Cadets, perhaps unsurprisingly, don’t like to make their beds. Many cadets save time and trouble by sleeping on top of
their beds and using some other blanket, which isn’t
hard to make neat as a top cover. While such behavior might seem silly, it isn’t really harmful. Cadets who sleep on top of their blankets aren’t any
less healthy than those who sleep between the
sheets. The rules are a clear product of paternalism: The Academy does not have anything to gain
by having the cadets sleep between their sheets; the
cadets should just do it because they will see that
in the long run they like it better.
Mill rejects such rules on the grounds that a
person’s right to determine his own ends, even if
they appear to be harmful to himself, superseded
someone else’s obligation to help him out. Mill’s
creed is: help only those that desire help; help no
one against his will. Mill’s beliefs echo the ideological slant of most Americans in that regard; having
someone else determine what is best for oneself
grates against most American sensibilities.
In summary, personal autonomy is something
Americans hold dear, with good reason. However,
personal liberty cannot be completely unrestricted,
because many of the actions people perform affect
those around them. Thus, every society and every
organized group within that society must restrict
its members’ freedom to a certain extent. Of the
many principled ways of restricting one’s freedom,
this chapter has focused on three: the harm principle, the legal-moral principle, and the principle
of paternalism. Each of the three rests on a different assumption about the place of personal liberty
among other important values. The harm principle
holds personal liberty as its highest value, and
would restrict personal freedom only when it interferes with another person’s ability to legitimately
exercise his own freedom. The legal-moral principle
subordinates personal liberty to morality. In practice, the specific moral rules that restrict autonomy
take the form of laws that the society recognizes.
Finally, the principle of paternalism subordinates
an individual’s autonomy to what a privileged person or group of people believe to be in the best interest of that individual.
In order for an organization to act consistently,
it should only use one set of principles of autonomy
for each distinct goal. The principle it applies should
be consistent with that organization’s explicit or
implicit values and that specific goal, so that its
treatment of its members accurately reflects its values. The military should fulfill its mission within
the ideological framework of the society that it
serves. Though not an uncontroversial claim, it is
not unreasonable to take the position that the principle that best reflects fundamental American values is the harm principle.
Admittedly, there are numerous laws in the
United States that are somewhat paternalistic and
moralistic (such as helmet laws for bikes and motorcycles), but debates usually rage around laws
that are purely paternalistic and moralistic (such as
the drinking age and the use of marijuana). Moreover, supporters of those laws usually end up claiming that such laws are in the collective interest of
the society. Such arguments indicate that many
Americans would find unacceptable explicit appeals to morality or paternalism as the sole principle for lawmaking.
In addition, the mere fact that open argument
about which principle is best supports the claim that
freedom, in both beliefs and actions, is the strongest value that America as a whole supports both
Constitutionally and as a matter of popular belief.
As a result, it appears that the Army ought to regulate itself in accord with the harm principle, and
despite their appeal, not with the legal-moral principle or the principle of paternalism.
256
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
THE HARM PRINCIPLE AND THE MILITARY MISSION
The question, then, is one of how to apply the
harm principle to members of the military. In other
words, soldiers’ personal autonomy should only be
limited in order to prevent harm to others, including the organization. Considering all the restrictions
of autonomy soldiers actually experience, does the
Army unnecessarily violate the harm principle?
It is important to remember that in the All Volunteer Force (AVF), the soldier enters the military
knowing its goals and commits to accepting them as
his own. While the United States currently has an
All Volunteer Force, this has not always been the case
and it is possible that it won’t be the case in the future. For the purposes of this discussion, we will assume that society has moral justification to utilize
a military draft in order to protect itself. The argument for this justification is beyond the scope of this
chapter. It is this author’s opinion that the limitations on autonomy should be the same for all soldiers regardless of how they entered the military.
Thus, the military can limit soldiers’ autonomy
consistent with the harm principle. Specifically, the
Army takes steps to insure that soldiers’ behavior
doesn’t harm others or the organization itself, so it
legitimately limits soldiers’ autonomy. The Army
has a particular mandate to fulfill2:
• Support and defend the Constitution of the
United States against all enemies, foreign
and domestic.
• Ensure, by timely and effective military action, the security of the United States, its
territories, and areas vital to its interest.
• Uphold and advance the national policies
and interests of the United States.
• Safeguard the internal security of the
United States.
The military accomplishes its purpose, in large part,
with the use of volunteered human resources. As a
result, it must safeguard those resources.
Beginning with the seemingly less important, but
highly annoying restrictions of liberty, the military
appears to act paternalistically. It dictates that its
members be healthy, have plans for childcare, have
tidy lawns, wear seatbelts, wear helmets while biking and motorcycling, and so on. Are such rules justified in an organization that should (as an explicitly American organization) reject the principle of
paternalism? Though the paternalism principle
might seem to be the obvious justification for the
rules, the same rules can be generated using the harm
principle. First, one’s physical condition is usually
crucial to performing one’s military job well; the
military wishes to safeguard its members. Thus,
there are rules about physical fitness, wearing
seatbelts and helmets, and not being addicted to
drugs or alcohol. Second, because the most important parts of soldiers’ jobs entail that they carry
them out away from their families, having plans for
childcare is important to ensure soldiers’ mental
well-being when separated from their families.
Fewer emotional concerns will allow them to concentrate on their jobs better than otherwise. Third,
even having a tidy lawn is important, because a tidy
lawn is part of “good order” and “good order” is
essential to maintaining operational readiness. Because the money for housing comes exclusively
from taxpayers, well-maintained housing is better
than ill-kept housing, for which taxpayers (and
members of Congress) might not be willing to pay.
Even though good commanders promote many
of these rules among their subordinates in ways that
don’t explicitly appeal to the reasons outlined above
(so well-kept housing is encouraged by appealing
to its function as a morale booster or by subsuming
it under the principle of taking good care of the
equipment one is issued [which, incidentally, has
been stressed much more as budgets become more
and more limited]), it is the harm principle that
drives the rules. So, though the military often looks
like it acts paternalistically, the restrictions that actually ensure that soldiers’ behavior doesn’t harm
the organization are justified. Those that are exclusively paternalistic are not justified, in this author’s
opinion.
INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY VS THE NEEDS OF THE ARMY
In addition to the apparently less important restrictions of autonomy soldiers face in the Army,
there are several fundamental issues concerning the
clash between individual liberty and the needs of
the military. Foremost among these are issues of conscientious objection and following orders. These
will be discussed in detail in this chapter. A third
issue, that of making judgments about appropriate
medical care, is an especially interesting issue because it concerns the autonomy of patients and doctors, the legitimate goals of the Army, and the clash
between two sets of professional values for the mili257
The Soldier and Autonomy
tary healthcare professional. These issues are discussed elsewhere in some depth by Howe in Chapter 12, Mixed Agency, in this volume, as well as
Howe and Jones,3 and Beauchamp and Childress. 4
Conscientious Objection
Conscientious objection (for those who have already joined the military of their own volition)
seems to involve a clash between an individual’s
autonomy and prior expectations of the military experience, and the reality of life in the military. Current regulations ameliorate but do not completely
relieve this tension. An application of the harm principle based on an understanding of the purpose of
the Army can, however, help resolve the tension.
Current Regulations
US Army regulations accommodate a secular society by providing for the separation of those who
have “a firm, fixed and sincere objection to participation in war in any form or the bearing of arms
because of religious training and belief”5(Gloss) where
such beliefs “may include solely moral or ethical
beliefs.”5(Gloss) Prior to the advent of an all-volunteer
force in 1973, one filed for conscientious objector
status before entering the armed forces. Current
regulations allow one to apply while serving because the military realizes that a person’s beliefs
can change over time. Many of the people now joining the military do so at a fairly young age, before
they fully form their belief systems. As they mature or gain more experiences, it is possible that they
might legitimately change their basic beliefs. Thus,
if a soldier has a significant change in outlook, there
is a legitimate claim to conscientious objector status even though the individual originally volunteered to be in the armed forces.
Army regulations allow an objection to war in
general (hereafter referred to as moral pacifism) but
not to a particular war (hereafter referred to as situational pacifism). Soldiers are not allowed to leave
the Army because they have decided for pragmatic
or political reasons that the appropriate response
to a particular situation is nonviolence rather than
violence. The following discussion explores the rationale for this policy.
Moral Considerations of Conscientious
Objection/Pacifism
The relevant moral considerations pertaining to
pacifists break into two categories: concerns with
moral pacifists and concerns with situational pacifists. One of the foundations of the United States is
the freedom to act in accordance with a wide range
of convictions, and in most cases, Americans are
allowed to act as they see fit as long as their behavior does not harm or interfere with the rights of
another. It follows that moral pacifists should be
allowed to resign from the Army, and regulations
allow for that.
The status of a situational pacifist is parallel but
significantly different. A common reason to think
about leaving the US armed forces or to desire to
forego fighting in a particular war is because one
believes that for certain moral reasons, one ought
not be fighting in it. If a particular war is morally
unjustified, the killing that the soldier did would
be morally wrong (on a moral par with murder).
Of course, even though the killing would be morally wrong, it would not be illegal. As a general rule,
soldiers cannot be held accountable for knowing
whether a particular war is morally acceptable because most members of the military have much less
information than necessary to make an educated
decision. Thus, one fighting in an immoral war
might not be blameworthy for the bad actions taken
in the war (barring war crimes). Culpability aside,
if one believed that the war on which one were to
embark was immoral, then one would believe that
he was going to unjustifiably kill people. Is it fair
to force someone to do something he believes is
willful and unjustified killing? Do we have a strong
prima facie reason to allow situational pacifists out
of the Army, even though the regulations say they
must stay in?
The topic is more complex than it first appears
because the Army has a twofold obligation that
comes into conflict with an individual soldier’s
desires to make autonomous decisions. First, it must
protect the interests and persons of the citizens of
the United States. This obligation is obvious—without people to protect, there is no need for an army
in the first place. Second, the military must ensure
the well-being of its soldiers and officers. Each of
these obligations is moral, not merely legal. Thus,
the armed forces have an obligation to be as effective as possible. The more effective they are, the
more able they are to fulfill their first obligation.
The Army is most effective when cohesive units
comprise it. The well-being of each member of a unit
is also enhanced when he is a member of a cohesive unit. Thus, cohesion is necessary in order to
satisfy both the first and second obligations of the
Army. (See Chapter 6, Honor, Combat Ethics, and
Military Culture for a further discussion of cohe258
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
sion.) However, cohesion is damaged when members of a unit decide either before or during a particular conflict that they will not participate. Such
a possibility weakens the perceived trust and dedication the unit’s members have for each other. The
Army cannot allow harm to come to the unit as a
whole or its soldiers as members of that group. As
a result, the Army has a moral interest in denying
situational pacifists conscientious objector status.
This interest is indeed moral, even though we have
explained it by showing practical results of allowing situational pacifists to leave the Army.
A unit’s effectiveness also depends on having
well-trained people for each role that it has. Everyone in a unit has a distinct job, and the skills required for each job must be practiced. Many of the
jobs are not easily interchangeable. As a result, soldiers are not simply cogs in a machine. Each has a
particular function. To allow people to leave the
military prior to a war means that the Army must
suddenly and unexpectedly allow key positions to
go unfilled, which in turn has a negative impact on
unit effectiveness. Furthermore, the Army must be
able to depend on soldiers to be combat ready. If,
as an institution, the military provided soldiers a
means to “opt out” of the most rigorous and dangerous duties, the military could not depend on any
units to be deployable. Indeed, as has been shown
with combat stress reaction, as discussed by Jones6–8
(as well as discussed in Chapter 12, Mixed Agency,
in this volume), inappropriate evacuation for
minimal dysfunction can open the floodgates to extensive personnel losses. Similarly, allowing individuals to claim situational pacifism might open a
comparable floodgate. Thus, given the Army’s twofold moral obligation, it has a prima facie obligation
to deny situational pacifists (and by this argument
moral pacifists as well) the freedom to leave the
military.
A unit’s effectiveness is also dependent on the
morale of its members. It is possible that a retained
situational pacifist will have negative effects on
morale by grousing, or convincing other soldiers
that their cause in a particular instance is not just.
It might also introduce divisions into a unit by placing those who support the government’s aims and
those who do not in close proximity to each other.
For this reason, the Army has a prima facie obligation to allow situational pacifists to leave. Thus, we
have conflicting prima facie moral obligations—an
obligation to deny situational pacifists the freedom
to leave vs an obligation to allow them the freedom
to leave. Two more relevant factors facilitate a resolution to this conflict.
First, members of the military have an obligation
to the state, and when they attempt to leave they
are violating that obligation. When joining the military, a soldier, in effect, enters into a contract with
the state. Members of the state have agreed to pay,
feed, house, and provide for the medical needs of
soldiers. In some cases, they agree to educate them
and provide them with pensions. The government
notifies the soldier (by declaring war or dispatching the soldier on an operation other than war)
when the need for services in that capacity arise.
Thus, when a soldier says, “I have decided that I
ought not engage in this particular activity,” the
soldier is also implicitly saying, “I know that I told
you I would protect your interests in exchange for
a salary, food, housing, medical care, and training,
and you have upheld your end of the bargain, but I
made a mistake. I cannot perform my job in good
conscience. You must let me out of the contract (at
no cost to myself).”
Other things being equal, such a breach of contract is immoral and is likely to cause harm to the
Army. The soldier voluntarily entered into the contract, thereby limiting his autonomy in certain respects. Suppose that the situational pacifist offers
to pay the government back for the money it has
invested in him, or that he offers to fulfill his time
in a nonmilitary capacity. Would it then be acceptable to allow situational pacifists out of the Army?
No, because that is not the deal the military made.
Part of the reason is that once the person is trained
in a particular Army unit, the Army risks too much
of a loss to allow such an opting out. Thus, to leave
the military as a result of situational pacifism is an
unjustified breach of contract and therefore is justifiably prevented using the harm principle.
Second, members of the military have given up
their rights to decide which wars should be fought
and which should not. It is one of the explicit conditions of joining the military. Soldiers and officers
have given up that much of their political freedom.
Thus, by entering the military they have decided
(or should have decided) that they trust the state’s
ability to engage only in morally justified wars. If
they do not trust the state to make those decisions,
then they should not enter the military. Thus, before they enter the military, citizens have an obligation to consider the possibility that they will disagree with the state’s decisions. If they decide to
enter the military, they should come to terms with
the fact that they might have to fight in what they
believe to be unjust wars. Those who mistrust the
judgment of the United States government when it
comes to waging war should not enter the military
259
The Soldier and Autonomy
in the first place; they have knowingly restricted
their autonomy by joining the Army.
In sum, the conflicting rights and duties of the
military and the soldier are as follows: A soldier has
a right (and generally an obligation) to refrain from
what he believes to be immoral actions (such as engaging in an immoral war). A soldier has a moral obligation to uphold contracts into which he has freely
entered. The military has an obligation to effectively
protect Americans and an obligation to ensure the
well-being of its soldiers. The military has an obligation to enforce its contract with soldiers into
which it entered on the behalf of American citizens.
One can now see, at least in part, why the Army
does not allow situational pacifism. The Army is
taking steps to insure that it can perform its moral
obligations. By denying situational pacifists conscientious objector status, the Army is taking steps to
fulfill its obligations to prevent harm to the citizens
of the United States and the soldiers that comprise
the Army.
However, one still might question whether it is
the best moral position. It seems that the Army’s
position ignores individuals’ rights to act on their
deepest, most sincere convictions. In effect, by denying conscientious objector status to situational
pacifists, the Army is telling people that they must
kill other innocent people, even when they believe
that the killing is murderous. And this seems to be
a very difficult position to take, especially because
the Army discharges moral pacifists.
All the arguments that support the position that
situational pacifists should stay in the Army—unit
cohesiveness, unit competence, contractual obligation to the state—support the position that moral
pacifists should stay in the Army as well. And if
moral pacifists should be allowed to leave because
their rights to act on rational, nonharmful, deepseated convictions ought not be violated in the
United States, then it appears that situational pacifists should be released on those grounds as well.
Is the difference in treatment justified? Yes.
The two situations are relevantly different on one
point. Moral pacifists have decided that all violence
is wrong, regardless of circumstances. Situational
pacifists have decided that they would like to retain their right to decide when to fight and when
not to fight; they have not decided that all violence
is wrong. They have decided that one particular war
is immoral. They make this judgment based on the
limited information that they have at their disposal.
In many cases, relevant information is justifiably
kept from them for security reasons. Sometimes the
information is kept from them for unjustified reasons, as well. For whatever reason, in many cases
soldiers do not know whether their leaders are acting morally or immorally. Sometimes the soldiers
might be right, and sometimes they might be wrong.
But the judgment about the morality of particular
wars is always difficult, even after the fact when all
the information is public. During a war, when governments restrict access to much of the relevant information, the judgment is even more difficult to
make reliably. (This lack of accessible information
is precisely what justifies holding soldiers accountable only for the particular and extraordinary
crimes that they commit in war and not for the “ordinary” killing they do.) Thus, their retention in the
Army appears to be justified.
There is still the problem that some people who
genuinely believe that a particular engagement is
immoral might nonetheless be forced to commit
what they see as murder. In order to account for
that significant problem, there appears to be only
one moral solution: retain the soldier but reassign
him to a noncombatant position (1-A-O). In this
way, the situational pacifist would not be forced to
commit what he believes is murder. The argument that
he will still be helping the war effort in some way
is not particularly persuasive. Every taxpayer supports war efforts. Every citizen of a country supports
the war either directly or indirectly. Thus, reclassification as 1-A-O, rather than discharge as 1-O (pacifist), is reasonable in light of his voluntary entrance
into the armed services.
Though this might be the best moral solution, it
is one that no one can pragmatically endorse because it depends on an unrealistic assumption—
namely that the Army can reliably identify authentic situational pacifists. Humans are not omniscient.
Thus it would be extremely difficult in most cases
to tell when someone was a genuine situational
pacifist. As a result, the responsible administration
of such a policy would be nearly impossible. It is
very difficult to verify that someone is a moral pacifist rather than a coward. It is even more difficult
to verify legitimate instances of situational pacifism
when the person involved faces the immediate and
dangerous prospect of going to war. Because the ideal
solution rests on the military’s ability to distinguish
between those who genuinely oppose the war on
moral grounds and those who oppose the war because of cowardice or a preference not to be exposed
to danger, it would be impractical to attempt to
implement it.
In addition, implementing this ideal moral solution would probably compromise the Army’s ability to carry out the job it was created to do. It is
260
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
possible that a great number of soldiers would decide that a particular war was immoral. As a result,
the Army would lose key personnel from the jobs
for which they were trained, which would adversely
affect unit effectiveness, and thus combat readiness.
Unit cohesion would also be damaged, once again
having a detrimental effect on unit effectiveness. By
granting situational pacifists conscientious objector status, the Army would make its job of efficiently
and effectively defending American interests nearly
impossible.
Someone who opposes a particular engagement
nonetheless still has the means to morally avoid the
conflict. If one were truly to believe that what one
would be engaging in was murder, one could refuse
to fight and be sent to jail. It is hardly an appealing
option, but to spend the duration of a war in jail is
much better (from a moral standpoint) than going
to war and killing people. Someone might argue
that it is possible to go to war and just not kill anyone. That is, one could aim high with one’s weapon.
This is not a morally acceptable option. Failure to
use any weapon accurately could put many of one’s
fellow soldiers at risk. If one told them, it would
have a negative effect on unit cohesion. If one did
not tell them, it would be unjustifiably putting them
at risk because they had no reason to believe that a
fellow soldier would intentionally fail to perform
the role of the combatant. Furthermore, many jobs
in the US Army require one to use area weapons
(for example, the field artillery), where one cannot
see the target. Therefore, one cannot ensure that one
will avoid killing others by simply aiming poorly.
In fact there might be fratricide (friendly casualties),
civilian casualties, or even more enemy dead, because the misdirected fire could land anywhere.
Thus, failing to perform one’s duties as a method
of expressing conscientious objection is not viable
because it puts others at risk.
The difficult solution to the problem of conscientious objection relies primarily on soldiers’ voluntary entrance into the US Army. They knowingly
restrict their autonomy and need to consider the
weighty effects their decision has before they commit. The Army needs to do its part in making sure
soldiers understand their full commitment before
they join.
Case Studies
Before concluding this discussion of conscientious objection, it might be instructive to consider
two recent cases in which Army doctors applied for
conscientious objector (CO) status.
Case Study 9-1: Captain Huet-Vaughn and Situational Pacifism. Captain Yolanda Huet-Vaughn was a
physician in the US Army Reserve and was assigned to
the 325th General Hospital in Independence, Missouri.
She was ordered to active duty at Fort Leonard Wood,
Missouri, in the fall of 1990 as part of a nationwide activation of reservists in response to the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait in early August. On 19 December 1990, she was
reassigned to the 410th Evacuation Hospital that had
mobilized at Fort Riley, Kansas, pending its deployment
to Southwest Asia in support of Operation Desert Shield,
the preparation phase of the Persian Gulf War. She deserted her unit on 31 December 1990 before it deployed.
She voluntarily returned to duty on 2 February 1991 (when
Operation Desert Storm, the combat phase of the Persian Gulf War, concluded) and applied for conscientious
objector status. She underwent general court martial for
desertion and because she was found to be guilty, her
application for conscientious objector status was never
reviewed. 9
Comment: Captain Huet-Vaughn filed for conscientious objector status on the grounds that she believed
that particular war crimes were going to be committed
during the combat that she anticipated in the Persian Gulf.
In her case, it was evident that she had no moral or legal
grounds for claiming conscientious objector status because her argument was not against violence in general,
but with the looming Persian Gulf War in particular. Nor
did she believe that she personally was going to be forced
to engage in any crimes. Had her application for conscientious objector status been reviewed, Captain HuetVaughn would likely have been denied conscientious objector status both legally and morally as her pacifism was
situational.
Case Study 9-2: Captain Wiggins and Political Pacifism. Captain David Wiggins, on active duty stationed at
Fort Hood, Texas, filed for conscientious objector status
on 27 February 1990. His education at the US Military
Academy at West Point and subsequent medical degree
had both been paid for by the federal government. Following the disintegration of communism in Eastern Europe in 1989, Captain Wiggins became convinced that
nonviolence could be an effective way to bring about
change. Though his pacifism was secular, the Army neither denied his conscientious objector status on those
grounds nor questioned his sincerity even though no one
appeared to know of his pacifism prior to his filing for
conscientious objector status. The board denied him conscientious objector status on the grounds that his beliefs
were motivated by the current political situation and thus
did not qualify as “deeply held moral, ethical or religious”
beliefs as Army Regulation 600-43, Conscientious Objection (as interpreted after the Seeger ruling10 in 1965
that defined “religious training and belief”) requires. The
Conscientious Objector Review Board said that Wiggins’
beliefs were philosophical and political rather than moral
or ethical. 11
Comment: Captain Wiggins did not legally qualify for
conscientious objector status. Should he have? The an261
The Soldier and Autonomy
swer to the question is a bit tricky; it depends on the regulations and court cases governing conscientious objector
status. According to Army Regulation 600-43,5(Subchap 1-7) a
person qualifies for conscientious objector status if,
among other things, his position is a result of “religious
training or belief.” According to Seeger, “religious training and belief” should be understood as “an individual’s
belief in a relation to a Supreme Being involving duties
superior to those arising from any human relation, but
[not including] essentially political, sociological or philosophical views or a merely personal moral code.”10 As a
result of this definition, the Army says that “requests for
discharge after entering military service will not be favorably considered when: ...(3) Based solely on considerations of policy, pragmatism or expediency.... (4) Based
on objection to a particular war. (5) Based upon
insincerity.”5(Subchap1-7)
The regulation specifically prohibits one from legitimately receiving conscientious objector status for situational pacifist reasons. It also prohibits one from receiving conscientious objector status based on philosophical
or political reasons. This latter prohibition is somewhat
problematic. The difficulty lies in the Army’s distinction
between philosophical beliefs and “moral or ethical” beliefs. Many thoughtful people hold sincere moral beliefs
on which they are ready to act, and which are motivated
by traditionally “philosophical” reasons. Many of the great
moral philosophers of the 19th and 20th centuries, for
example, acted consistently with their theories. In an age
of increasing secularization, it is not unusual for a person
to form deeply held moral beliefs on the basis of philosophical, rather than religious, reflection. Some of the
most influential “philosophical” moral theories consider
the consequences of actions morally relevant (a
consequentialist moral theory). Some of the relevant consequences include current political facts. As a result, to
deny a person conscientious objector status because a
belief came as a result of philosophical reflection based
on consequentialist moral theory is unreasonable.
Captain Wiggins was denied conscientious objector
status because his pacifism was deemed to be philosophically and politically motivated. Though Captain Wiggins’
argument was inadequate and did not support his position, he appeared to believe that it did. In his personal
statement, Captain Wiggins said that nonviolence was
the only vehicle that could bring about change. His argument, as he stated it, seems to support only situational
pacifism, although he believed it to be one for moral pacifism. Captain Wiggins was arguing about the particular
facts of the breakup of communism in Eastern Europe,
not general claims about how humans react to things. He
could have used these facts to support a general argument, but he didn’t. If he in fact sincerely believed his
position supported moral pacifism and was willing to base
his actions on that belief, he should have been granted
conscientious objector status. Whether one is granted
conscientious objector status depends on what the person believes, not whether that belief is a good or reasonable one. The military recognizes the acceptability of conscientious objection because it recognizes the legitimate
personal conflicts that arise when a person who is a part
of the military comes to believe that all forms of armed
conflict are immoral. Because the conflict arises because
of what the person believes, not whether it is actually true
that all forms of armed conflict are immoral, conscientious objector status is granted on the basis of what a
person sincerely believes, not whether the person’s beliefs are justified.
The cases of Captain Huet-Vaughn and Captain
Wiggins illustrate some of the difficulties that arise
as a result of the conflict between personal beliefs
and restricted autonomy that comes as a result of
entering the military. Balancing the competing relevant features of a situation in such a way that one
arrives at a morally satisfactory conclusion is extremely difficult. However, one typically encounters the tensions associated with conscientious objection when a war occurs. Fortunately, wars have
been relatively infrequent. Unfortunately, conflicts
between soldiers’ moral obligation to follow orders
and the moral status of those orders occur even
when there isn’t a war. As a result, these sorts of
conflict occur more frequently.
Following Orders
A second major concern about soldiers’ autonomy comes in obeying orders. The problem is
complex, and the following discussion will only
address the most significant points. Though this
discussion oversimplifies things, it raises many of
the crucial moral issues. In what follows I will discuss the moral status of disobeying orders. It is
important to understand that the US Army only allows for disobeying illegal orders and does not consider the moral status of the orders a commander
might issue. Thus the US Army does not make any
official provisions for disobeying a legal, but immoral order.
Which Orders Must Soldiers Follow?
In any hierarchical organization, those being told
what to do will sometimes dislike what they have
been told to do. In fact, sometimes they will not
want to do it. Given its mission, the Army has an
interest in controlling most facets of a soldier’s life.
Thus, it has many occasions to tell soldiers what to
do. As a result, soldiers have many opportunities
to not want to do what they have been told to do.
Which, of all the things a soldier is told to do yet
does not want to, are the ones he needs to do? That
is, which orders must a soldier follow?
The answer obviously is not, “None of them.” It
262
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
is important to be clear why that is true from a moral
and not merely a pragmatic standpoint; by now, the
reasons should be familiar. Morally, soldiers must
follow orders because they said they would. They
voluntarily entered the Army and accepted the benefits the Army offered in exchange. Thus, soldiers
have a prima facie moral obligation to follow all
legal orders. The Army specifically states that soldiers should not obey illegal orders. However, beyond war crimes, it does not specify which orders
are illegal.
Moreover, the Army has an obligation to demand
that soldiers quickly and efficiently follow orders,
in order to fulfill its mission. In wartime, it is fairly
obvious why this is so, as much of what goes on is
extremely time sensitive. People need to go where
they’re told and do what they’re told to do in a
timely fashion. This is also true during training exercises. Even during peacetime, it is important that
soldiers follow orders without question. In part, this
is so that they become habituated to doing so. Moreover, even in peacetime, the Army needs to operate
efficiently. Thus, there isn’t a lot of time for disobedience and questioning. This expectation is clearly
justified by the previous discussion of the harm
principle. So, which orders must a soldier follow?
The answer is not, “All of them.” Even though
the Army needs soldiers to follow orders without
hesitation and without question, and even though
soldiers have agreed to follow orders in that way,
there is one type of order that the Army should not
expect its soldiers to obey: immoral orders. Thus,
the answer to the question, “Which orders must a
soldier follow?” is “All orders that are both legal
and moral.”
However, sometimes it is no easy task to distinguish morally acceptable from morally unacceptable orders. In ordinary life the task of discerning
which actions are moral and which are immoral can
be rather tricky. In a military setting the questions
are even more difficult, because many of the activities that soldiers must engage in during armed conflicts are ones that would be obvious instances of
immoral behavior in a civilian setting. These include
intentionally killing people one doesn’t even know,
destroying other people’s property, and rounding
people up and detaining them. If a leader, these also
include ordering one’s soldiers to do extremely
dangerous things, including ordering them to their
deaths.
It is impossible to overstate the difficulty in
knowing when it becomes morally permissible or
necessary to perform these otherwise “immoral”
actions in a military context. But, even though the
task is hard, understanding why it must happen is
generally not that difficult. In fact, orders are usually unambiguously moral or unambiguously immoral. Part of the reason for this is that all illegal
combat orders (ie, war crimes) are immoral orders.
The United States has agreed to conventions that
outlaw or restrict many forms of morally questionable behavior. Thus, knowing international law as
it relates to soldiers’ behavior during war is a vital
part of resolving potential conflicts between following orders and behaving immorally. Army Field
Manual 27-10, The Law of Land Warfare,12 outlines
the relevant international laws. Apart from knowledge of the law, some orders are obviously immoral,
and a soldier should trust his ability to recognize
such orders.
Which Orders Are Soldiers Allowed to Disobey?
Blatantly immoral orders (eg, being ordered to
kill unarmed civilians) do not really pose a problem for a soldier who wishes to live morally: He
should bring their moral status to his superior’s
attention. If the superior fails to respond accordingly, the soldier should disobey the order, and if
possible bring the situation to the attention of the
chain of command. In some instances a soldier
might even attempt to prevent the carrying out of
such a blatantly illegal order. Instances of obvious
immorality are relatively rare in a good army.
The truly problematic orders are those that are
not obviously immoral. These are ones that the receiver believes are immoral, but the giver and at
least some others do not. These possibly immoral
orders also fall into two broad categories—those
orders that are immoral because of their effects on
one’s own soldiers and their property, and those orders that are immoral because of their effects on the
enemy (combatants, noncombatants, and protected
property). Though the source of immorality is different, discussion of the dilemma remains the same.
These truly problematic cases must be contrasted
with ones in which a soldier might have an understandable, but illegitimate, reason for wishing to
disobey an order. For instance, soldiers might wish
to disobey orders that make it likely that they will
die or be severely wounded in their attempt to obey
them. Though perhaps understandable, in most
cases this is not an acceptable reason to disobey an
order. After all, the profession of arms is not a safe
one, and one engaged in it voluntarily accepts the
risks that go along with it. Thus, the mere fact that
one is going to die if one follows an order is not a
good reason to reject it. However, if one is given an
263
The Soldier and Autonomy
order that would result in serious harm (death or
injury) to those following it, the order might be
immoral if such harm was needless. The obvious
difficulty comes in discerning whether the harm is
needless. As a general rule, soldiers will not have
enough information to decide whether their orders
are pointless. In most cases, those immediately
above them in the chain of command will not have
access to that information either. A high casualty
rate might be necessary from one company in order to promote the safety of a brigade. The platoon
leaders in the unfortunate company might not understand the overall situation as they receive their
orders, especially if the tactical considerations do
not allow their superiors to give them a complete
explanation of the reason for their mission. Sometimes a commander might have access to all the information, but the situation is still morally ambiguous, as Case Study 9-3 demonstrates.
Case Studies
Case Study 9-3: Pickett’s Mill: An Example of Moral
Ambiguity. During the Atlanta Campaign in the American Civil War, a little noted battle, Pickett’s Mill, took place
on 27 May 1864. The chain of command for the key Union
military leaders at Pickett’s Mill was:
William T. Sherman
Union Army commander
Major General of Volunteers
Brigadier General of Regulars
George H. Thomas
Army of the Cumberland
Major General of Volunteers
commander
Oliver O. Howard
Corps commander
Major General of Volunteers
Thomas J. Wood
Division commander
Brigadier General of Volunteers
William B. Hazen
Brigade commander
Brigadier General of Volunteers
General Sherman was the commanding officer of Union
forces in the engagement. One of his corps was to attack
two well-entrenched Confederate divisions. Major General Howard, the Corps Commander, placed General
Hazen’s brigade in the front, and told him that he was to
be the first wave of an attack in column, with each column attacking just minutes behind the others.
However, just before the attack Hazen overheard General Wood, his division commander, remark to General
Howard that he would let Hazen’s brigade go in unsupported and see what success it had. Howard consented
to Wood’s idea. Despite what he overheard, Hazen proceeded with the ordered attack, although a member of
his staff later claimed that Hazen’s face clearly showed
his understanding of being lied to and betrayed by his
superiors. Hazen’s brigade, though it fought valiantly—in
fact the Confederates believed that an entire division had
attacked them—was decimated. The brigade, which
started out with 1,500 men, lost approximately 500 men
in 45 minutes. Hazen later argued that Howard’s orders
were immoral. He blamed Howard, not Wood, because
Howard was the ranking officer and consented to Wood’s
plan. In a postwar memoir, Hazen wrote that he would
have protested the order had Howard not told him that he
believed Hazen’s force had the greatest chance of succeeding. He remained bitter about the incident for the rest
of his life.
Comment: It is not clear whether Hazen should have
disobeyed his orders once he understood what was
really going to happen. Thus, the battle at Pickett’s Mill is
difficult because it is not altogether clear that Hazen’s
commanders believed their orders were immoral, nor is it
likely that Howard would have altered his orders in the
face of Hazen’s complaint. 13,14
The battle at Pickett’s Mill helps illustrate two
points. First, it illustrates a situation in which orders are morally ambiguous even when it appears
that one has all of the facts. Second, it highlights
the difficulty of deciding what to do in a situation
in which one’s orders are morally ambiguous. Suppose that Hazen had decided, which it appears that
he had, that his orders were immoral. What should
he have done? He had three realistic options. He
could have questioned General Howard and explained his reluctance to obey, he could have disobeyed, or he could have obeyed without comment.
In this situation, Hazen should have questioned
Howard about the order, especially because there
was some time before the attack was to take place.
However, what would the result of questioning
have been? Probably it would have done nothing
more than making Howard angry and reiterating
the order. In that case, Hazen still would have been
in a difficult situation as he would have to either
obey or disobey the order.
Even supposing the order was unambiguously
immoral, his decision would still be difficult. Were
Hazen to disobey the order, he would likely be removed from command, and another officer would
lead his brigade into the same battle. Moreover, he
would no longer be in a position to try to prevent
needless loss of life later in the war. Were he to obey
the order (as he in fact did), the likely result would
have been the unnecessary death of several hundred men. Still, Hazen could do what he could to
minimize those deaths, and because he would still
be in command, he could seek to minimize unnecessary deaths of troops in the future. Either way,
the decision is difficult. Neither answer provides a
satisfactory rule for what one should do in the face
of an immoral order.
Case Study 9-4 is a well-known example of an
illegal combat order (a war crime) that was clearly
264
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
an immoral order as well, and yet many of the
American soldiers who received the order also carried it out.
Case Study 9-4: My Lai and Following Orders. Originally My Lai was thought to be a Vietcong stronghold, so
the order was given to Lieutenant William Calley for his
platoon to “kill everyone there.” Calley’s superior officers
had built the raid up in importance. Military intelligence
picked a market day when they thought the town would
be empty of non-Vietcong (the civilian villagers would have
traveled to a neighboring village for the market). In the
face of absolutely no resistance (none of the soldiers received fire), Calley ordered his platoon to round up villagers, including women and children, and execute them.
He further ordered his platoon members to burn huts. Both
of these orders are illegal as well as immoral. Several of
his men disobeyed, others fled. (Lieutenant Calley’s immediate superior, Captain Ernest Medina, who had given
the original oral order to “kill everyone” was in radio communication as the killings were occurring. 15) An aviation
warrant officer who arrived on the scene had his men
deploy against Calley and evacuated a group of civilians
who were otherwise going to be executed. 16
Comment: Calley was never directly ordered to kill
unarmed civilians. In interviews afterward, most of the
soldiers admitted they knew what was happening. Some
ignored the orders, some obeyed and felt guilty, and some
later committed suicide. 15
Sometimes, an order is so obviously immoral, as
the My Lai case demonstrates, that one should not
obey it, even if it means one cannot help prevent
further immorality in the future. But sometimes, it
might be that one ought to obey the orders in order
to minimize the immorality being performed. Such
reasoning is dangerous, as it might allow one to
rationalize obeying any order, and it might encourage a certain overestimating of one’s judgment and
value, but it is possible that a situation might arise
in which such reasoning was morally acceptable.
For instance, it might be immoral to order one’s
suicidal soldier to carry live ammunition during a
parade, but as long as that is the only immoral thing
one was required to do, it might be wise to oversee
the activity to minimize the immorality that might
result.
When one faces an order that one believes to be
immoral, he should consider the following two factors. First, he must consider his moral obligation to
follow orders and to follow them without questions;
frequently time is of the essence in the military. He
must consider it within the context of how much
information he has, understanding that soldiers
rarely have all the relevant facts in any given situation. In Eugene Sledge’s book, With the Old Breed,
at Peleliu and Okinawa,17 he recounts a story that
makes this point. As a young Marine enlistee during World War II, Sledge is ordered to wash out oil
drums on a hot summer day. He and his buddies
decided it was make-work and did a poor job. Several months later, at the front, he had to drink barely
potable water out of those same poorly washed
drums. While the order to wash the drums was not
an immoral order, the issue of lack of information
is illustrative of the problem.
Second, when facing an order that one believes
to be immoral, he must consider both the consequences of his alternatives (as in the case of Pickett’s
Mill) and the treatment of those around him (even
if using soldiers for AIDS testing has good effects
for society overall, it is still not permissible to use
them for testing against their will). Both the overall consequences of the action (good for society) and
how the action affects each human involved (tests
on soldiers) are thus relevant. Sometimes the overall consequences are more important, and sometimes the poor treatment of even one person is more
important. How to sort them all out depends on the
specific features of each situation. Unfortunately, it
is impossible to come up with a rule that explains
how to weigh each of these two factors. Practical
judgment and experience are essential guides. One
cannot blindly follow a rule such as never lie, for
there are times when lying is necessary. One ought
to lie to a Nazi demanding to be told where all the
Jews are. One must not blindly follow any moral rule.
Because the Army has an obligation to carry out
its purpose, it should have competent and ethical
leaders (this issue has already been discussed in
Chapter 5, The Profession of Arms and the Officer
Corps, and Chapter 6, Honor, Combat Ethics, and
Military Culture, of this volume). An army cannot
work efficiently if its members obey orders at their
own discretion. Given the trust it must have in its
leaders and the lack of information many subordinates might have, the Army demands that soldiers
follow all legal orders.
This still leaves a problem for the soldier who
knows, for one reason or another, that, appearances
to the contrary notwithstanding, a particular order
is immoral because of its effect on his army’s soldiers. In that case, the soldier must decide whether
to disobey and possibly be punished, or obey and
do something he believes to be immoral. That is, he
is left in a similar dilemma to the one in which a
conscientious objector finds himself. Unfortunately,
there are cases when the morality of the order is
not altogether clear. The Army’s position must be
that all legitimate orders must be followed. It is
265
The Soldier and Autonomy
important to remember that most orders are appropriate and moral. Their occasional perceived impropriety frequently stems from lack of information.
In the instances when they appear inappropriate,
the soldier must do his best to gather information
as available, weigh the relevant factors as the case
dictates, act according to his conscience, and accept
the consequences of his action or inaction.
CONCLUSION
Limited autonomy in the military is in stark contrast to autonomy in the civilian sector, especially
in free societies. Resolving the dilemmas and apparent dilemmas that result often rests on remembering that the limits to soldier autonomy are currently voluntary in the United States due to the All
Volunteer Force. The more difficult problems are
often best addressed by recognizing the competing
loyalties and ordering the conflicts of interest. Morality trumps all other responsibilities and interests;
legitimate obligations to the US Army (when voluntarily entered into) trump other personal interests, and these personal interests come last. The
difficult conflicts often come when a person has two
important competing loyalties, such as the military
and the medical profession, the military and certain religious beliefs, or the military and one’s family.
REFERENCES
1.
Mill JS. On Liberty. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co Inc: 1978: 9.
2.
US Department of the Army. The Army. Washington, DC: DA; 1996. Field Manual 100-1, Chap 2.
3.
Howe EG, Jones FD. Ethical issues in combat psychiatry. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM,
eds. Military Psychiatry: Preparing in Peace for War. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of
The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1994: 115–131.
4.
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1989.
5.
US Department of the Army. Conscientious Objection. Washington, DC: DA; 1998. Army Regulation 600-43.
6.
Jones FD. Psychiatric lessons of war. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes JW, eds. War
Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of
the Army and Borden Institute; 1995: 1–33.
7.
Jones FD. Traditional warfare combat stress casualties. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM,
Stokes JW, eds. War Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1995: 35–61.
8.
Jones FD. Disorders of frustration and loneliness. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes
JW, eds. War Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US
Department of the Army and Borden Institute; 1995: 63–83.
9.
US v Huet-Vaughn, ACMR 9101873, US Army Court of Military Review, 39 MJ 545; 1994 CMR Lexis 15.
10.
US v Seeger, 380 US 163 (1965).
11.
Wiggins v Secretary of the Army, US District Court, Waco Division, Civil No. W-90-CA-304.
12.
US Department of the Army. The Law of Land Warfare, 18 July 1956, Change 1, 15 July 1976. Washington, DC: DA;
1976. Field Manual 27-10.
13.
Bierce AG. The crime at Pickett’s Mill. In: McCann W, ed. Ambrose Bierce’s Civil War. Washington, DC: Gateway;
1988: 38–49.
14.
Hazen WB. A Narrative of Military Service. Boston: Ticknor and Co; 1885: 256–264.
266
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
15.
United States. Department of the Army. The My Lai Massacre and Its Coverup: Beyond the Reach of the Law? The
Peers Commission Report. New York: Free Press; 1972.
16.
Montgomery D. 30 years later, heroes emerge from shame of My Lai massacre. Washington Post. 7 March 1998:
A1, A10.
17.
Sledge EB. With the Old Breed, at Peleliu and Okinawa. New York: Oxford University Press; 1990.
