1
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
MILITARY MEDICAL ETHICS
VOLUME 1
SECTION I: MEDICAL ETHICS
Section Editor:
EDMUND D. PELLEGRINO, MD
John Carroll Professor of Medicine and Medical Ethics
Georgetown University, Washington, DC
Kindly Doctor
© Royalty-Free/CORBIS. Reproduced with permission.
2
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
3
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
Chapter 1
THE MORAL FOUNDATIONS OF THE
PATIENT–PHYSICIAN RELATIONSHIP:
THE ESSENCE OF MEDICAL ETHICS
EDMUND D. PELLEGRINO, MD*
INTRODUCTION
IS A FOUNDATION FOR MEDICAL ETHICS POSSIBLE?
SOME CURRENT MODELS OF THE PATIENT–PHYSICIAN RELATIONSHIP
The Physician as Clinical Scientist
The Physician as Body Mechanic
The Physician as Businessman
The Physician as Social Servant
The Physician as Helper and Healer
Summary of the Models
HEALING AND HELPING: THE “END” OF MEDICINE
External Morality
The Ethics Internal to Medicine
Elements of an Internal Morality for Medicine
The Clinical Encounter: Where Internal and External Morality Meet
Medical Ethics and Social Responsibility
Medical Ethics, Culture, and History
A Common Ethics for the Health Professions
CONCLUSION
*John Carroll Professor of Medicine and Medical Ethics, Georgetown University; Senior Research Scholar, Kennedy Institute of Ethics, Georgetown
University; and Senior Research Scholar, Center for Clinical Bioethics, Georgetown University Medical Center, 4000 Reservoir Road, NW,
#D-238, Washington, DC 20057; formerly, President, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC; Director, Kennedy Institute of
Ethics, Georgetown University; and Founder, Center for Clinical Bioethics, Georgetown University Medical Center
4
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Photograph of a relief of The Manifestation of Asclepius During Incubation. The “model,” or idealized, patient–physician relationship: a patient who is ill and a physician who offers to help. Models of the patient–physician relationship
have been developed throughout the history of medicine and have shaped the way physicians and patients have
confronted each other. These models in each era have been the result of a fusion of three elements: (1) a philosophy of
medicine, (2) the ethos or dominant spirit of medicine itself, and (3) the linkage between these first two elements and
some philosophical school. These elements relate to each other in different ways and often recur from era to era, but
throughout the eras models often bear resemblance to one another because there is some facet of truth in each that
reflects the complexity of the human relationship between one who professes to heal and one who is in need of
healing.
© Gianni Dagli Orti/CORBIS; reproduced with permission.
5
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
INTRODUCTION
In medicine, whether in the civilian or military
setting, medical ethics begins and ends in the patient–physician relationship. The conception we
hold of that relationship shapes the decisions we
make in every clinical situation. It sets the standard
for right and wrong, good and bad professional
conduct. It is the final arbiter of the moral status of
every policy affecting the health of individuals or
the public. Even public health, military, and penal
medicine, which incorporate societal goals, must
balance those goals against the realities of the relationship of a patient and a physician. How we see
that relationship will determine the kind of society
we are, have become, or want to be.
For these reasons, this first chapter is devoted to
the moral foundation of the conduct of the patient–
physician relationship. Such a foundation, if it is to
be adequate as the keystone of the edifice of medical ethics, must at a minimum answer certain key
questions: Is there anything morally special about
the patient–physician relationship, and if there is,
what is it? What does the special nature of the relationship entail with respect to the duties physicians
and patients owe each other, the virtues they should
exhibit, or the rules, principles, and attitudes that
should guide their interactions in the clinical encounter? These questions are implicit in the later
chapters, which define the special nature of the
patient–physician relationship in the clinical and
the military context.
This chapter confines itself to the ethical aspects
of the patient–physician relationship. Its focus
therefore is on professional ethics—the ethics of the
physician as a professional (and, by analogy, to
other health professionals, eg, nurses, dentists, clinical psychologists, social workers). The content of
bedside ethical decisions—the ethics of particular
clinical dilemmas—is discussed in later chapters.
The religious and theological foundations of medical ethics are not included, even though, for many
Americans, they are the ultimate source of all morality, in general or in the professional life. Finally,
we must not forget that patients and physicians
meet each other in an intricate matrix of psychosocial, cultural, and sociohistorical phenomena that
can modify the expression of medical ethics. 1 These
factors notwithstanding, there is a foundation for
the duties of all health professions that is relatively
constant across cultures, history, and national
boundaries.
IS A FOUNDATION FOR MEDICAL ETHICS POSSIBLE?
Historically, the Hippocratic Oath (Exhibit 1-1)
and ethos were not universally accepted as the foundation for medical ethics by most ancient Greek
physicians. 2–4 They originated with a small group
of physicians who were eager to distance themselves from the majority of their contemporaries
who were itinerant journeymen, businessmen, and
craftsmen. In later antiquity, the Hippocratic ethic
found favor with the three monotheistic religions
and, through their influence, became widely disseminated. 5–7 At least from the late Middle Ages on,
and well into the modern era, the moral precepts of
the Hippocratic ethic were the standard for the ethical conduct of physicians. 8
Our concern is not with the evolution of medical
ethics as an historical or social epiphenomenon. It
is the deeper moral phenomena upon which it has
been based that are of importance. It is the existence of these phenomena, which the Hippocratic
physicians and their successors grasped intuitively,
that accounts for the durability of their ethic across
so many centuries, countries, and cultures.
A quarter of a century ago the question of whether
or not a foundation for medical ethics was possible
would have seemed a naive question. At that time the
Hippocratic ethics, exemplified by the oath, the socalled “deontological” books of the Hippocratic Corpus (dealing with the oath, precepts, the law, decorum, and the physician),9,10 and its congeners in the
Code of the American Medical Association (AMA)11
and dozens of other codes of medical ethics and variations,12 were taken for granted as the source and foundation for the ethics of the patient–physician relationship. Today this foundation is no longer secure. An
increasing number of ethicists, physicians, and even
the public, believe not only that the Hippocratic ethic
is out-of-date but that the whole idea of a stable foundation for ethics is no longer tenable.
Several challenges singly, and in combination,
have brought about this present state of affairs. Four
that seem most important are: (1) the upheaval in
social values in the 1960s; (2) the interest in medical ethics by professional philosophers; (3) the transformation of medical ethics into “bioethics”; and
(4) the “postmodern” turn of philosophy in general,
and moral philosophy in particular.
The first serious contemporary challenge to the
Hippocratic foundation was sociopolitical. Beginning
6
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
EXHIBIT 1-1
THE OATH OF HIPPOCRATES
I
swear by Apollo Physician and Asclepius
and Hygieia and Panaceia and all the gods
and goddesses, making them my witnesses, that I will fulfil according to my
ability and judgment this oath and this
covenant:
To hold him who has taught me this art as equal
to my parents and to live my life in partnership with
him, and if he is in need of money to give him a share
of mine, and to regard his offspring as equal to my
brothers in male lineage and to teach them this art—
if they desire to learn it—without fee and covenant;
to give a share of precepts and oral instruction and
all the other learning to my sons and to the sons of
him who has instructed me and to pupils who have
signed the covenant and have taken an oath according to the medical law, but to no one else.
I will apply dietetic measures for the benefit
of the sick according to my ability and judgment; I
will keep them from harm and injustice.
I will neither give a deadly drug to anybody
if asked for it, nor will I make a suggestion to this
effect. Similarly I will not give to a woman an abortive remedy. In purity and holiness I will guard
my life and my art.
I will not use the knife, not even on sufferers
from stone, but will withdraw in favor of such men
as are engaged in this work.
Whatever houses I may visit, I will come for
the benefit of the sick, remaining free of all intentional injustice, of all mischief and in particular of
sexual relations with both female and male persons, be they free or slaves.
What I may see or hear in the course of the treatment or even outside of the treatment in regard to the life
of men, which on no account one must spread abroad, I will keep to myself holding such things shameful to
be spoken about.
If I fulfil this oath and do not violate it, may it be granted to me to enjoy life and art, being honored with
fame among all men for all time to come; if I transgress it and swear falsely, may the opposite of all this be my lot.
Reproduced with permission from: Edelstein L. The Hippocratic Oath: Text, Translation and Interpretation. In: Sigerist HE, ed.
Bulletin of the History of Medicine, Supplement 1. Baltimore, Md: The Johns Hopkins Press; 1943: 3. Artwork © Bettmann/
CORBIS; reproduced with permission.
in the late 1960s in America, for various reasons (as
discussed further in Chapter 3, Clinical Ethics: The
Art of Medicine), all traditional values and sources
of moral authority were challenged—religion, the
family, parents, teachers, all holders of authority,
and all the professions. This was the era of participatory democracy, which saw the rise of the consumer movement, civil rights legislation, the
Patient’s Bill of Rights, and a rash of student protests against academic tradition and authority. In
such a climate physicians, medicine as a privileged
profession, and medical ethics were especially vulnerable. They were seen as elitist, monopolistic of
power, and self-aggrandizing.
7
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
The second challenge came from professional
philosophers who for the first time in their history
took a serious interest in medical ethics. To be sure,
the ancient philosophers often referred to medicine,
but neither they nor their modern counterparts ever
wrote serious treatises on medical ethics. Only in
the last quarter of the 20th century did philosophers
examine the moral presuppositions of the traditional ethic. They did so using the conceptual tools
of a variety of established moral systems. Each system introduced its own perspective on the relationships between physicians and patients. For example, the followers of the philosophy of Kant,
placed their emphasis on patient autonomy; those
who followed J.S. Mill chose utility maximization;
and followers of W.D. Ross turned to prima facie
principles (see Chapter 2, Theories of Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Structure). As a result, the
Hippocratic tradition of benevolence and beneficence was reinterpreted as authoritarian, insensitive to social ethics, and even unjust. Other major
precepts, such as the prohibitions against abortion,
breaches of confidentiality, and sexual intercourse
with patients, were relaxed. Currently, the prohibitions against assisted suicide13 and euthanasia are
under attack. Pressures have steadily mounted for
an oath and code more congruent with contemporary mores. 14,15
The third challenge arose out of the progressive
intrusions into medical ethics by law, politics, economics, psychology, and culture. Beginning in the
1980s, a larger view of medical ethics emerged under the new rubric of “bioethics.” Bioethics extended beyond the bedside to social and public
policy, ecology, and the environment. In the 1990s
scholars in the social sciences entered this broader
field. Those outside the field of philosophy challenged
philosophical ethics as a rational discipline. They
judged it too abstract and insufficient to encompass
the full complexity of the moral life. Alternative
theories and models of ethics such as casuistry, narrative, virtue, feminist, and caring ethics have been
proposed. 16 To remedy these presumed deficiencies,
ethics itself has often been reduced to issues of public
policy and procedure rather than patient–physician
relationships. 17
The fourth challenge in the erosion of traditional
medical ethics arose in the attack on philosophical
ethics by the “postmodern” critique of philosophy
itself. This critique centers on the claims of reason,
itself, to arrive at moral truth. The postmodern critique challenges the traditional pretensions of philosophy to achieve moral truth through reason
alone. Postmodernism declares philosophy to be
“dead.”18,19 Secular bioethics is particularly vulnerable to this critique because it built its endeavor on
the post-Enlightenment project of ethics free of
metaphysics and religion and dependent only on
an autonomous rationality. Postmodernism has become a “deteriorated version of the Enlightenment.”20(p20) Postmodernism deprives contemporary
bioethics of its rationalist underpinnings and denies it access to any foundation or overarching
theory. In this view, any foundation for medical ethics such as the Hippocratic ethic, or the one this
chapter shall describe, is ipso facto intellectually
suspect.
This surely is not the place to attempt the complex task of refutation of the postmodernist thesis.
But as Rosen argues, postmodernism reduces philosophy to ideology. This places the ideology of linguistic fashion in the place formerly occupied by
philosophy. 19,20(p176) We may try to eliminate foundations, but there is always a position of last resort
beyond which we cannot retreat. Call it what we
will, this position of last resort is in fact a “foundation.” Thus antifoundationalism is the postmodernists’ position of last resort.
What is of relevance to this chapter is that contemporary medical ethics faces an important choice
with very practical consequences. (For a more
detailed discussion of postmodernism and deconstructionism, please see Chapter 3, Clinical
Ethics: The Art of Medicine.) If medical ethics
chooses to go the postmodernist route, it must accept a variously interpreted and deconstructed
ethic, one malleable by social and linguistic construction. Profession and patients will fragment
further and further into smaller and smaller communities with different and contradictory moral
values. 21 A uniform set of moral precepts binding
all physicians will no longer be possible. Each therapeutic encounter will become a new negotiable
event with its own rules, duties, and principles, or
the whole of bioethics will be left to social consensus. 22 Any notion of a foundation for ethics based
in respect for human life will be replaced by a
technological determinism. 23
This chapter takes a different pathway—the way
of reconstruction of the ethical foundation for medical ethics, not its deconstruction. This does not imply a simplistic reaffirmation of the Hippocratic
ethic. A true “reconstruction” means retaining what
is valid in the old and enlarging it by new insights.
This is not the same as changing ethics to accommodate to social mores. The beginning, a quarter
century ago, of formal philosophical reflection on
the Hippocratic moral precepts, uncovered a genuine need for their justification beyond mere assertion. This has been salubrious because it changed
8
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
medical ethics from a set of free moral assertions
into a respectable ethical enterprise. This chapter
undertakes a reconstruction of medical ethics out
of the empirical phenomena of the clinical encounter and the experiences of illness and healing. These
are the universal phenomena that underlie the relationships of patients and physicians across temporal and cultural barriers. These are the relationships perceived by the Hippocratic physicians but
never formally or systematically argued.
SOME CURRENT MODELS OF THE PATIENT–PHYSICIAN RELATIONSHIP
Medicine is a multivaried societal phenomenon
in which physicians may play a variety of roles simultaneously. Each role elicits a particular kind of
relationship with the patient and entails a particular kind of ethic. One of these roles, the role of
healer, is primary; the others are subsidiary. Before
turning to the reconstruction of this primary role,
it is important to examine some of the alternative
models and the ethics they entail. Pedro Lain
Entralgo has written most perceptively about the
history of the patient–physician relationship. 24,25 He
summarizes the relationship in terms of the
physician’s motives under four general headings: (1)
physician as technical helper; (2) physician as seeker
of knowledge; (3) physician as functionary of an institution; and (4) physician as a seeker of profit. 24
Elements of these motives are intermingled in each
of the more specific models to be examined below.
The Physician as Clinical Scientist
One prominent model, often emphasized in
medical schools, is the patient–physician relationship as an exercise in applied biology. 26 In this
model, the relationship is a means for attaining
knowledge and also for applying existing knowledge to solve a patient’s diagnostic or therapeutic
problem. The ethic governing this kind of relationship is the ethic of good science, the rules of which
are objectivity, honesty in recording data, technical
competence, and so forth. The patient is the object
of study seen as a concrete instance of the universal laws of biology and pathology. This model does
not deny the existence or importance of psychosocial and personal elements in the genesis or treatment of the illness. But these elements are not considered properly as in the domain of medicine or
the physician. They belong to social workers, psychologists, and pastoral counselors. It is the
physician’s task to take note of these subjective elements but to refer them to others for treatment.
The Physician as Body Mechanic
A variant of this model of the physician as clinical scientist is to see the patient–physician relationship as a mechanical event equivalent to the owner
of a defective automobile bringing it in for repair
or replacement of a part. 27 In this model, the physician is the mechanic and the patient is the owner of
a part to be fixed. Psychosocial and personal elements are really irrelevant. Because they are not
mechanically fixable, they are not part of the
physician’s task. The ethic of this relationship is the
ethic of technical competence, impersonality, and
fulfillment of a service contract.
The Physician as Businessman
In the business model, healthcare is a commodity to be bought and sold on the open market for
profit. 28 Its price, availability, distribution, and quality are dependent upon competition. The patient is
a consumer who shops for care as he shops for other
needed goods. The patient is a source of gain for
the physician who competes for patient “business.”
The ethic in this model is the ethic of business and
the “ethic” of the marketplace. In the market, patients are players whose welfare depends upon
what they can command in the way of resources
and what they can negotiate in trade. Solicitude or
concern for the “loser” is important only if it makes
for better business. If someone makes a wrong
choice, or lacks the wherewithal to enter the market in the first place, this is unfortunate but not the
concern of the physician, or those for whom the
physician works.
Two variants of the market relationship model
are the entrepreneur and the managed care models. 29,30 These roles may be combined when physicians are simultaneously caregivers, “providers,”
and investors, owners, or risk-sharers in managed
care organizations or healthcare facilities. Here providers compete for capitation contracts to provide
care for large target populations, preferably those
with few medical needs who will pay their premiums and will not need much in the way of care. The
physician is an employee of an organization or one
of its owners. The dominant ethic is the ethic of
competitive business and corporations. This is a
minimalist ethic always at risk of compromise if
profit margins drop. The patient becomes a cus9
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
tomer and client, a source of gain, or a unit of care—
an “insured life” who can be “traded” in mergers
or contract negotiations.
In these technical and market models, the physician regards the practice of medicine primarily as
an occupation, a way to make a living rather than a
means of service to others. Practicing medicine is a
job like any other. There is no requirement to extend oneself beyond the job description. The ethics
implicit on this kind of relationship is the ethic of
the employee whose aim is to satisfy the patient so
the patient will return and will recommend the
physician to others. Only as much kindness and
compassion as are needed for success need be offered. There is no commitment beyond strict working hours. Choice of physician is not important because physicians are interchangeable. The patient
often is seen not as a personal responsibility of the
physician, but of the organization.
The Physician as Social Servant
Another model increasingly being pressed upon
today’s profession is the physician as social servant,
as primarily an instrument of societal, or fiscal,
good. Medical knowledge is thus directed to some
purpose beyond, in addition to, or along with, meeting the needs of the individual patients. Examples
of this genre are the physician acting as rationer in
a managed care system, physicians as employees
of a penal institution, physicians in military service,
and public health physicians. The physician’s primary orientation is toward the good of the population in general, or a specific population in a social
institution. The ethic implicit in this model is a
population-based ethic. These are the roles of the
physician as bureaucrat or functionary using medical knowledge for purposes other than the good of
the individual patient.
The Physician as Helper and Healer
The most traditional model, and ethically the
most demanding, is the model of the physician as
helper and healer, a committed professional whose
primary obligation is to the good of his patient. 31 In
this model, the physician is committed to something
other than self-interest, advancement of career or
occupation, or even the good of society. This model
is based ethically in the specificity of the role of
TABLE 1-1
MODELS OF THE PATIENT–PHYSICIAN RELATIONSHIP
MODEL
PHYSICIAN
PATIENT
ETHIC
Applied biology
Clinical scientist: uses
Biological object harboring
Good science, truth,
knowledge to solve
a disease
objectivity, technical
medical problems
competence
Body repair
Body mechanic: fixes
Owner of defective body
Technical competence,
biological problems
part
fulfillment of service
contract
Commodity transaction
Businessman: competes
Consumer of medicine and
Business, the laws of the
for clients
source of gain for the
marketplace
physician
Investment opportunity
Businessman: views self
Unit of care, which can be
Competitive business,
as an entrepreneur
sold or traded by contract
marketplace concerns, profit
margins
Managed care industry
Businessman: functions
Client whose consumption
Corporate goals, economic
as an employee
of care must be controlled
concerns
Social utility
Social servant: uses
Client who is a societal
Population-based needs of the
medicine as instrument
subunit
 many versus the individual
of societal good
Professional
Helper, healer: uses
Person to be helped
Covenant of trust
medicine for the patient’s
benefit
10
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
physician as healer, helper, and curer. This ideal is
not always actualized to be sure, but it has been at
the heart of the Hippocratic ethic and its many
variations. It is the model that this chapter proposes
as the foundation for the ethics of the healing professions.
Summary of the Models
Table 1-1 lists the models of patient–physician
relationship that we have discussed in this chapter.
These are models that are now in vogue and often
competing for primacy. Each implies a different
theory of medicine, a different interpersonal relationship between physician and patient, and a different ethic. In each of these models, except the healing model, the physician uses medical knowledge
for what can be a good or bad purpose. These other
purposes are not intrinsically evil, but neither are
they distinctive of medicine because medicine is
defined by its healing purpose. When purposes extrinsic to medicine, itself, conflict with the end of a
healing relationship, ethical dilemmas arise in
which priority must be given to patient welfare. 32
The nature of these conflicts (eg, the physician as
military officer, public health official, or forensic
psychiatrist) will be treated in other chapters. This
chapter focuses on the “end” of medicine as medicine, on what distinguishes it as a special kind of
human activity with its own internal morality.
HEALING AND HELPING: THE “END” OF MEDICINE
Medicine and physicians are a part of the social
and historical fabric of the cultures within which
they live and function. Medicine therefore is in part
economics, business, societal purpose, and function.
But it is not primarily any of these things. If a true
foundation for medical ethics is to be found, it must
be sought in what is unique to medicine, and this is
the healing relationship between the patient and the
physician. It is from this uniqueness that an ethic
specific to medicine can be defined. The ethical
implications of this uniqueness may be derived externally, by some form of social construction, or by
applying some preexisting system of morals and
ethics to the phenomena of medicine. Alternatively,
the ethics of medicine may be derived internally, by
a study of the phenomena of medicine itself. We will
examine both approaches methodologically and
substantively.
External Morality
An externally determined ethic is most often derived from a preexisting system of moral philosophy
with origins outside medicine but applied to the
activities peculiar to medicine. This is generally a
“top-down” approach in which medical ethics
draws upon principles, duties, or rules and action
guidelines developed outside medicine to define
morally appropriate conduct, or choices. Some examples are the derivation of duties of physicians
and patients from the deontological ethic and categorical imperative of Immanuel Kant,33 the principle of utility maximization of John Stuart Mill,34
natural virtue ethics of Aristotle,35 or the Christian
virtues as exemplified in Thomas Aquinas. 36 Similarly, an external source of medical ethics might be
drawn from a religious tradition, as in the theological ethics of Thomas Aquinas, the Catholic casuist
tradition,37 or an updated conception of natural
law,38 the Protestant tradition,39 or the Jewish halakic
tradition. 40,41
In recent years, systems of externally derived
ethics have had their origins in sociocultural mores, in social constructivism, or coherence theories.
Here the justification for judgments of right and
wrong are determined by societal consensus, or coherence with other accepted beliefs and principles,
or by “reflective equilibrium,” a dialogue between
general principles and intuitive judgments. 42 Existential,43 narrative,44 caring,45 and feminist ethics46
are further examples of external systems for the
derivation of right and wrong. These and other ethical theories have been applied to medicine to justify
what ought and ought not to be done in particular
clinical situations.
The foregoing “external” sources of medical ethics are formulated in other chapters in this book and
will not be given further consideration here. In any
contemporary study of medical ethics, they deserve
serious consideration. They express moral truths of
various relevance to, but not necessarily determinative of, right and good conduct for physicians and
other health workers. They relate to, but are not determined in the first instance by, the nature of medicine as a special kind of human activity. In one way
or another, they leave a gap between ethical theory
and the realities of the moral world of physician
and patient. To close this gap, it is necessary to move
more closely into the lived worlds of physician and
patient—to a more internally determined ethic. 47
11
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
The Ethics Internal to Medicine
There are several senses in which an ethic may
be internal to medicine. One is the ethic expressed
in ethical codes elaborated within the profession
by physicians, for physicians. Examples would be
the Hippocratic Oath,9(pp299–301) the ethics of the Chinese physician,48 the Indian Code,49 the ethical
“code” of Thomas Percival prepared for the physicians at the Manchester Infirmary,50 the AMA Code
of 1847, its many revisions since then, and their
expansion in the Opinions of the Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs of the AMA. 11 The ethical
codes of the World Health Association, the British
Medical Association, and a multitude of others
would all be internal in this sense. These codes were
prepared for, and by, members of the profession
without significant input from those outside the
profession.
These internal codes generally turn out to be
statements of moral belief mixed with etiquette.
They exhibit little in the way of formal “ethics,”
because their moral foundations are taken for
granted and not derived or justified by analysis or
argument. Their moral content is surprisingly similar to that expressed in the Hippocratic Oath and
ethic. These codes all express certain moral truths
that have shaped the ideals of professional behavior and the commitment of the community of physicians to patient welfare. They should not be discounted, as some suggest, simply because they were
prepared by physicians and for physicians. 51 Their
final test is not who composed them, but whether
or not they contain arguable or demonstrable ethical truths.
Laws pertaining to medical practice are external
to the internal morality of medicine. Laws are external because they promulgate statutes governing
the obligations of physicians to patients, the source
of which is legislative action outside of medicine.
Nonetheless laws are responsive to the special nature of the medical relationship. The laws of torts,
contracts, and fiduciaries, for example, recognize the
special nature of the patient–physician relationship.
In this latter sense, these laws accurately reflect the
special nature of the therapeutic relationship and
the vulnerability of patients who, as a result, are in
need of legal protection. Laws governing medical
practice, thus, get their moral force from their recognition of the realities of the patient–physician
encounter.
Also situated somewhere between the internal
and external boundaries of medicine are theories
of ethics or models of the relationship with strong
sociological and psychological foundations. One
example would be Lain Entralgo’s formulation of
friendship (philia) as the foundation of the relationship. 24(p149) Other examples would be the notion
of caring, the patient’s or physician’s life story or
narrative, or the experience of practice itself. Each
concept has roots in the actualities of the patient–
physician relationship; none is sufficient in itself to
be the basis of a normative ethic for that relationship. Each is important but best incorporated in the
view of a healing ethic.
Elements of an Internal Morality for Medicine
For purposes of this chapter, the term internal
morality will be used more narrowly to signify a
foundation for medical morality arising within the
phenomena peculiar to medicine, those that define
it as a special form of human activity, and by that
fact generate specific moral responsibilities binding only on those who profess medicine or the other
health professions. The three phenomena specific
for the patient–physician relationship are: (1) the
fact of illness; (2) the act of pro-fession; and (3) the
act of medicine. Together they comprise the healing relationship, the end of which is the good of
the patient.
The Fact of Illness
The most fundamental fact about medicine is that
it exists because humans become ill. This and mortality are the two most universal characteristics of
human existence. They transcend culture, history,
and all other differences between and among humans. Illness is a subjective existential state in
which the patient’s sense of well-being or accommodation with existing disease is threatened or
compromised by some new symptom or sign. The
person who recognizes himself as ill enters a new
stage of existence in which his humanity is diminished in several specific ways.
First, there is the loss of freedom to do what one
wishes because of pain, disability, discomfort, and
so forth. Being ill creates anxiety, fear of mortality,
and disability. Illness may or may not correspond
to objective pathology (ie, disease). Illness threatens the image of one’s physical and emotional integrity. The illness then becomes a center of concern and diverts energy and attention from other
pursuits. It creates a disorganization and disequilibrium of the whole of the person’s existence.
12
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Ill persons may tolerate this state of disequilibrium for a long time but ultimately most decide they
need help. That is when they become patients— persons bearing a burden of suffering. (The word “patient” is derived from the Latin patior, patiens, pati
meaning “to suffer, bear a burden.”52[pp1308–1309])
When people become patients, they realize they
need the knowledge and power of others to be
healed. Patients then no longer treat themselves but
are compelled to seek out a health professional in
whom eventually they must place trust. They must
enter a relationship of inequality because the health
professional possesses the knowledge and skill the
patient needs. Thus when well persons become ill,
by that very fact, they become patients—vulnerable,
suggestible, and exploitable. They experience a
change in existential state that is not exactly parallel to any other state. Illness is a unique universal
phenomenon of human existence and it is that
uniqueness that generates its moral orientation.
The Act of Pro-Fession and Promise
In this special state of vulnerability, the patient
seeks out someone who professes to be a healer. The
physician or other health professional asks what is
wrong: “How can I help?” In this question, physicians invite the patient’s trust that they possess the
requisite knowledge, that they will use it to help
and not to harm (ie, to act in the patient’s best interests, not their own, and not in the interests of
others). When physicians voluntarily offer to help,
they make an implicit promise. They offer themselves as healers, helpers, and caregivers. They generate expectations they promise implicitly to fulfill. They voluntarily bind themselves, by that very
fact, to act beneficently. Their assigned societal role
and their possession of special knowledge require
them to help. Physicians thus automatically enter into
a covenantal trust relationship when they offer to care
for a patient. A covenant is more than a casual promise. It is a mutual agreement with something of the
sacred about it because it is made in the presence
of need by one capable of meeting that need.
This promise to help is an act of pro-fession (“profession” derives from the Latin profiteor, profiteri meaning “to acknowledge openly, to avow,” and professio,
“an open declaration of an intention”52[pp1475–1476]), that
is to say, it is a solemn promise that binds this physician to this patient in a way that makes the physician an accomplice if harm comes from the relationship. The patient may dissolve this bond unilaterally
by discharging the physician. But if the patient is
ill, the physician can end the relationship only after another physician has agreed to undertake the
patient’s care.
The Act and End of Medicine
It is the act of healing, helping, and curing (which
is what the patient seeks, needs, and expects from
the physician’s promise of help and the physician’s
invitation to trust) that initiated the relationship.
Help, healing, care, or cure are the immediate ends
of medicine. To be authentic, this end must be defined in terms of the good of the patient, that which
restores health, if that is possible, or provides comfort and care if restoration of health is not possible.
The good of the patient is a complex concept, multilayered and highly personalized. It consists of at
least four components: (1) the medical good, (2) the
good as perceived by the patient, (3) the good of
the patient as a human, and (4) the good of the
patient’s spiritual nature. 53
The first (and lowest on the scale) component is
the medical good—that which the competent application of medical knowledge can achieve—treatment, cure, comfort, or containment of the disease.
This is the most objective level susceptible to scientific apprehension. It is the level at which diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy function.
The second component of the patient’s good is
the good as perceived by the patient—what constitutes a “quality” life, the trade-offs the patient may
wish to make among the options for treatment, the
amount of risk, pain, discomfort, and disability that
will be accepted as a price of treatment. The
patient’s perception of good is subjective, individualized, and personalized. It may or may not correspond with the medical good as perceived by the
physician. It can only be defined by the patient.
The third component of patient good is more
general. It is the good of the patient as a human
being, as a being with inherent dignity possessed
of reason and will, free to choose, to plan one’s own
life with a minimum of coercion by others or by
events. It is this inherent dignity that entitles all
humans to respect for their own decisions and it is
from this good for humans that the principle of
autonomy derives. Justice, likewise, is grounded in
who and what we are, as possessors of a common
humanity. Justice requires equal treatment of patients and retribution for harm done to them. Keeping promises, such as the physician’s promise of
healing and helping, is also a matter of justice—
something owed to all persons.
The fourth component, and the highest good of
the patient, is whatever pertains to that individual’s
13
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
spiritual nature—beliefs about the nature and destiny of human life, its meanings, purposes, and relationships to sources of morality beyond human
determination. This good is also grounded in our
humanity as beings capable of commitments to ideals and beliefs beyond the needs of our material
bodies. This is the realm of religious belief, or
nonbelief, the ultimate source of morality for most
patients when confronted with their own finitude,
suffering, or despair. It is also the ultimate source
of morality for many physicians.
The immediate telos, or end, of medicine is to
advance the good of a particular patient on all of
these four levels. This is what healing means, that
is, to help the patient heal himself, to become whole
again to the extent possible within the limitations
imposed by the patho- or psychophysiological aberration that brought him to the physician in the
first place. To achieve this end will require in the
immediate term a right and good decision, one which
is scientifically and technically correct, and one
which conforms with the four levels of good as they
present in this patient. Morally valid medical and
clinical decisions therefore fuse the technical and
the moral dimensions in the moment of clinical decision. It is through the immediate end of a right
and good decision made with, and for, the patient
that the broader end of healing, and ultimately, the
even broader ends of health of the individual and
of society are attained.
A right and good decision must also be carried
out safely, efficiently, prudently, and with a minimum of pain and discomfort. These obligations
arise out of the seriousness of the promise to protect and advance the well-being of the patient. The
vulnerability of the patient, and the trust patients
must ultimately place in the physician’s skill, are
the foundation for the obligation to be competent
in performance as well as in knowledge. Competence in psychomotor skills is, therefore, a moral
requirement. Thus the internal morality of medicine rests on the relationships of three phenomena
that characterize the clinical encounter: the fact of
illness, the promise to help, and the healing act of
medicine. Schematically, they can be represented in
this way:
These are the ineradicable phenomena of the
human experiences of being ill, being healed, and
professing to heal. They are universal human phenomena. No matter which culture, historical era, or
national boundaries frame them, they are the same.
They are the same phenomena experienced by ancient Greek patients and their physicians as well as
today’s patients and physicians. They will be the
same in the next millennium and beyond because
they are elements of the human condition. Medicine will become more highly technical than it is
now, and more will be done by computers and automated means of diagnosis and treatment, but the
need of sick persons for human interaction, intercession, and counsel will remain. Indeed, as machines take over the procedures of medicine, the
need for the human touch and the ethical dimension of clinical decisions will be correspondingly
greater.
The Clinical Encounter
Principles and Duties
Up to this point I have distinguished external
morality, as any system of ethics derived from outside of medicine (like the ethics of Aristotle, Kant,
Hume, and Beauchamp and Childress), from internal morality, the derivation of duties, obligations, and
principles from the phenomenology of medicine itself. However, the internal morality of medicine is
not disconnected from the specific principles, rules,
guidelines, and virtues that characterize external
systems of morality applied to medicine. The difference in an internal morality is that they are derived from the empirical phenomena of the clinical
encounter. They are, therefore, not dependent upon
preexisting ethical theory or the resolution of disagreements between and among these theories.
The four principles of Beauchamp and Childress54
(ie, beneficence, nonmaleficence, autonomy, and
justice) are one example of an external theory of
medical morality that can be grounded more securely in the empirical realities of the clinical encounter. These principles have a firm foundation
because they are necessary to achieve the end of
medicine and fulfill the covenant of trust. Thus beneficence and nonmaleficence become duties because they are promised when the physician offers
to help in the way specific to his profession. They
are prima facie principles because no patient seeks
professional help to be harmed; patients seek to be
helped. No one expects to be used to advance the
physician’s or someone else’s good. Subjects in cliniThe Fact of the Illness
(Patient)
The Promise to Help
(Physician)
The Act of Healing
(Patient and Physician)
14
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
cal research may give free and informed consent to
participation to advance the good of others but even
the experimental subject’s good must always be
protected.
Autonomy, as argued above, is a good of the patient as a human being. It is one of the distinguishing characteristics of being human that we can make
plans, make choices, and control significant parts
of our lives. To ignore, override, or manipulate this
decision-making capacity is to violate the good of
the patient, to create harm and thus to defeat the
end of medicine, which is healing and not harming. To violate autonomy is thus a maleficent act.
Beneficence, nonmaleficence, and autonomy are not
in opposition but reenforce each other. Autonomy
is not absolute, however. The conditions that restrict
are subjects for other chapters.
Justice, like autonomy, is a good of the patient as
a human being. To violate justice is to violate an
essential feature of human existence (ie, what is
owed to each human simply by virtue of being human). Like violations of beneficence and autonomy,
violations of justice are maleficent and, therefore,
frustrations of the end of medicine, which is the
good of patients.
The Virtuous Physician
Like the prima facie principles of medical ethics,
the virtues physicians should exhibit are linked to
the ends of medicine and the phenomena that
characterize the healing relationship. Virtues in general are defined as “the state of character which
makes a man good and which makes him do his
own work well.”55(1106a:22–24) When the concept of virtue is incorporated into medical ethics, it refers
more specifically to those traits of character that
make a physician or nurse (or other health worker)
a good physician or nurse—one whose intention and
action optimizes attainment of the ends of the healing relationship. 56
Essential to the notion of a virtue from its earliest definition in Plato and Aristotle is the idea of
perfection (areté) in achieving a purpose. The virtuous physician or nurse is one who exhibits excellence in those character traits that enable one to
come as close as possible to the healing purposes
of the patient–physician (or patient–nurse) relationship. There are certain virtues or character traits that
are particularly crucial; indeed, so crucial that they
are entailed by the ends of medicine and without
them those ends cannot be achieved. Some of these
virtues are as follows57:
•
Fidelity to trust is inescapable in the real
world of a sick person seeking help. Without trust in the good intention of the physician and the physician’s capability to perform competently, healing becomes difficult
or impossible. The physician invites trust
and must therefore be faithful to that trust,
lest the offer to help be a lie and a deception.
•
Benevolence, namely the predisposition habitually to wish to act for the patient’s good,
is the virtue that disposes the physician to
do good, specifically to do good for the patient. This disposition is present even when
it costs the physician something in time,
frustration, loss of income, interference
with personal plans, and so forth. Benevolence is a requisite virtue even in those difficult and frustrating cases of patient noncompliance, or abuse of health practices, or
nonpayment of legitimate bills for service.
• Benevolence entails another virtue, namely
effacement of self-interest. This is the disposition to serve the good of the patient even
at some loss of personal self-interest. This
virtue has limits. But where those limits are
set is a highly personal matter. Heroic sacrifice is not required, but some degree of
self-effacement is essential to attaining the
ends of medicine. Without it a professional
loses that which distinguishes his work
from a mere occupation.
•
Compassion and caring are equally relevant
virtues. Compassion as a virtue is the habitual disposition to enter into the predicament of the sick person, to feel something
of that predicament with him, and, as a result, to wish to help. Without entering the
patient’s predicament to some extent, it is
not possible to heal in any full sense of that
term. Care is a virtue closely related to the
virtue of compassion. It may mean caring
for the patient, that is, taking a personal
interest in the patient’s fate, or taking care
in the way we carry out our professional
duties, or taking care of the patient’s need
and concerns. However interpreted, caring
is an essential virtue integral to any morally satisfactory healing relationship. It is
not, however, sufficient by itself to constitute a normative theory of ethics.
• Both care and compassion must be combined with objectivity if they are not to be
harmful. Objectivity allows for an assess15
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
ment of the actual physical state, diagnosis, and prognosis. It is united with compassion by putting all the factual data into
the lived world, life situation of this patient.
Objectivity and compassion complement
and balance each other.
•
Courage is one of the four cardinal virtues
from antiquity (the other three being temperance, justice, and prudence). It disposes
physicians to take the personal risks necessary to care for the sick in times of emergency, disaster, or war; to expose oneself to
contagion when necessary; and to take a
moral stand when cooperation with what
is morally wrong must be resisted.
•
Intellectual honesty is a virtue insufficiently
emphasized. Medicine and medical knowledge are powerful tools. They can be used
for good and harm, or for control over others. Recognizing what one does not know,
admitting it to oneself, to the patient, and
to one’s colleagues, is an essential safeguard
for the vulnerable patient. Intellectual honesty is the antidote to the vice of intellectual hubris to which all professionals, and
especially physicians, are so easily prone.
• In addition to intellectual honesty, a more
general disposition to humility is required.
This lies in a sober appreciation of the limitation of medicine as art and science, and
of the physician, himself as an instrument
of the patient’s healing. It is an awesome
thing to offer oneself to help or “heal” another. Merely to contemplate the demands
on the health professional’s knowledge,
compassion, and understanding of the predicament of illness is to impart a sense of
unworthiness on any responsible professional. Nonetheless, it is through fallible
human beings that the knowledge and skill
of medicine must be employed if the sick
are to be helped. Physicians and other
health professionals cannot permit themselves to be overwhelmed by their importance, nor by their sense of impotence and
inadequacy. What humility requires is a
calm and moderate assessment of the dangers of both indecision and presumption.
A knowledge of the limitations of one’s own
person and of the art, itself, is gained only
by careful, sustained, lifelong self-examination of the potential for good and harm in
arrogating to oneself the title of “physician,”
“nurse,” “psychologist,” “social worker,” and
so forth.
•
Finally, and one of the most important of the
clinical virtues, is prudence. This is not the
modern exercise of self-protective caution,
which avoids risks to one’s own welfare
and does not venture to do good if it means
a loss of self-interest. Phronesis, the Greek
word for prudent judgment or practical
wisdom, was, for Aristotle and Aquinas, the
link between the intellectual (the capacity
to know) and the moral virtues (the capacity to act well). 55(1144b30–1145a6),58,59 It encompassed the capacity of practical wisdom,
knowing how to choose the appropriate
means in a complicated situation so as best
to serve the good ends of the healing relationship. Prudence is the power of discernment. In the clinical context it is akin to
clinical judgment—knowing how, when,
and in what way, to act in the face of uncertainty, in a situation we have never encountered before, or one in which the virtues
themselves appear in conflict.
Obviously, there are other character traits that
can be entailed by the realities and ends of the patient–physician relationship but these just listed are
indispensable. In their absence it would be difficult
or impossible to assure a healing relationship that
met minimum standards of ethical propriety.
Virtues do not by themselves constitute a whole
moral philosophy for medicine. 60 They lack the
specificity and concreteness of principles, rules, and
axioms as action guidelines. Virtues also are subject to a multiplicity of definitions and orderings.
They may conflict with each other because they are
tied to the definition of the patient’s good, and there
may be differences about how to define that good
for, and with, a particular patient. The tendency to
subjectivism is accentuated by the circularity of the
logic that ordinarily accompanies virtue theories,
that is, virtuous persons do what is good; the good
is what virtuous persons do. However, by grounding the virtues in the empirical realities of the patient–physician relationship we can avoid some of
this circularity and most of the shortcomings of virtue theory in general.
The Virtuous Patient
The ethics of any human relationship implies reciprocal duties, principles, and virtues. In medical
16
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
ethics, it is the duties of physicians that are emphasized. Given the balance of power in the physician’s
favor and the vulnerability of the patient, this is the
morally proper ordering. Nonetheless, some mention of the patient’s obligations and virtues is necessary if a full account of the internal morality of
the healing relationship is to be provided.
If the end of medicine is to be attained, patients
must participate in their own healing, and must
facilitate the physician’s pursuit of this end. This
requires, at a minimum, that patients must be honest in the facts they provide in their histories of their
illness. They must not withhold, misrepresent, or
manipulate the facts for some ulterior motive. Patients should also cooperate in carrying out the
treatment plan by following directions and reporting changes promptly. Without this minimal cooperation, the physician cannot fulfill his moral obligation to attain the healing ends of medicine.
People, in addition, have responsibilities to preserve health even before they become patients. Smoking, dietary and alcohol excesses, sedentary habits,
failure to receive appropriate vaccinations, and similar behaviors thwart the “end” of medicine. Moderation (or temperance as it is sometimes called), another of the ancient cardinal virtues, is a requisite
virtue on the part of patients if health is to be maintained and the effects of disease are to be mitigated
or prevented.
Failures on the patient’s part are, however, not
ipso facto a warrant for refusing to treat the patient
who does become ill by failing to follow the physician’s advice or because of poor health behavior.
Physicians are not judges of the patient’s virtue and
are not empowered to punish patients by withholding their ministrations.
Patient autonomy is not absolute, however. The
good of the physician as a human being entitles him
to respect for his autonomy as well as the patient.
Thus, if a patient requests a treatment that is futile,
violates the canons of rational medicine or the religious beliefs of the physician, or poses a definable,
grave, and probable harm to an identifiable third
person, the physician is obliged to refuse. The physician, unless discharged by the patient, may withdraw from care of a sick person only when another
physician whose values are more congruent with
the patient’s is willing to assume care. Until that
time, the physician must care for the patient but
must also do so in accord with his own conscience.
The physician is a moral agent and as such must
take responsibility for his actions.
When no emergency is present, physicians may
refuse to care for a patient who threatens physical
harm to others, consistently violates the physician’s
instructions, or endangers the life of the physician.
Examples would be the violent drug addict, the
sociopath, or the psychotic paranoid patient who
threatens the physician or the physician’s staff.
Withdrawal can also be justified when the patient’s
repeated behavior makes achievement of the ends
or purposes of medicine totally impossible. This
decision must be taken with caution, without vindictiveness, and with a readiness to help again if
the patient changes this behavior or presents in an
emergency seeking assistance.
Another reciprocal duty of patients is to recognize their own finitude. There is a point in the natural history of any serious illness at which it becomes
futile to continue, or to add, treatments. Hippocrates
recognized this patient obligation when he said that
patients should not expect medicine to cure them
when they are overmastered by the disease. 61 This
can now be stated as a principle: There is no obligation to treat when treatment is futile (in other
words, ineffective, nonbeneficial, or overly burdensome in relation to benefit or effect). This is an obligation too often ignored by patients and families
who demand that everything be done even when
death is inevitable, the patient is in a permanent
vegetative state, and further treatment is without
value, or when the burdens outweigh the benefits.
Physicians and patients have mutual obligations to
recognize when treatment is no longer effective or
beneficial. Together they should then decide to desist from treatment.
Medical Ethics and Social Responsibility
This chapter has focused on the individual patient–physician relationship. Other chapters will
deal with institutional and social roles. However, it
is important to indicate that this emphasis on the
internal morality of medicine does not preclude, nor
excuse, physicians from societal obligations. The
physician is a steward of medical knowledge who
has been allowed certain privileges by society in
the course of caring for sick persons. These privileges include hearing confidential information, seeing and touching patient bodies (sometimes in very
intimate ways), as well as performing surgical procedures and using controlled substances to alleviate suffering. Acceptance of the privileges of a medical education and possession of medical knowledge
generates obligations to make them available for the
betterment of society. Medical students enter into a
similar covenant with society when they accept the
privileges of a medical education. These privileges
17
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
include the right to dissect human tissue, to participate in the care of patients as a student or resident, and to learn to carry out medical procedures.
These privileges are sanctioned by society so that a
continuous supply of medically trained personnel
can be assured for society.
Ethical issues arise when the physician is forced
to choose between the good of an individual patient and the needs of the society. Specific conflicts
of this kind as they occur in the military service and
in battle conditions constitute a large part of this
textbook and will not be covered here. Suffice it to
say that except in the most extreme exigencies, the
physician remains a physician always. To depart
from the internal morality of medicine is to repudiate what it is to be a physician. Persons who enter
any kind of relationship with a physician expect,
and have a right to expect, fidelity to the fundamental ethic of the profession. Any compromise
with this expectation for reasons of social or national exigency must be closely scrutinized if medicine and physicians are not to be used as means to
political, social, or economic purposes not their
own.
Managed care is becoming a paradigm case of
this issue. Physicians in managed care are urged to
become gatekeepers, to act as agents to conserve
society’s resources, and to take the needs of other
patients into account in deciding who gets what
care, and how much. Presumably physicians are
expected to deny needed care so that those more
needful may have access to that care (eg, to pay for
child health, to extend coverage to the uninsured),
or to cut costs and yield profits for investors.
On the covenant model of medical ethics detailed
in this chapter, physicians should not act as
gatekeepers. If there must be rationing, then it
should be explicit rationing, that is, rationing
through decisions on benefits made societally but
not by individual physicians in individual cases. All
patients need to know the limitations society places
on their care. With explicit rationing physicians can
still serve the patient’s interest within the confines
of externally imposed limitations. But with explicit
as with implicit rationing, the physician must reserve the right to refuse to obey a social policy if it
is harmful to his patient.
Physicians should make a societal contribution
to cost containment. First, they must practice the
most rational medicine, providing only what is effective, beneficial, and not excessively burdensome.
When two treatments are equally effective, the less
expensive should be chosen. Another way to contribute to societal welfare is to provide expert testimony to policy makers so that benefit packages can
be based on effectiveness and benefit, not cost. A
third way is to act together as a profession for the
welfare of the sick, especially for the underprivileged, the poor, the disabled, and the elderly who
do not fare well in market and competition-driven
managed care plans. Finally, as a citizen, the physician has a duty to be informed of public policy, and
to foster the welfare of the sick through lobbying
for appropriate public policy. There will be times
in managed care organizations when the pressure
on physicians to serve interests other than those of
their patients will so damage the trust relationship
that virtuous physicians have a duty to refuse.
Medical Ethics, Culture, and History
Some may object that in a culturally pluralistic
world like ours, the idea of a stable foundation for
medical ethics binding on all physicians across national and cultural boundaries is an anachronism.
It is true that responses to illness and disease by
patients, physicians, and societies may vary widely.
People in different times and cultures have different attitudes and behaviors in the presence of pain,
suffering, and death. They value human life itself
and the lives of the aged, disabled, or unborn in
different ways. Their interpretation of the meanings
and origins of illness vary, as do their therapeutic
endeavors.
The same is true in ethics. The emphasis on autonomy, truth telling, and confidentiality is closely
bound to Anglo-American beliefs in individual freedom, privacy, and self-determination. 62,63 In other
cultures, decisions may be made by families, tribal
chieftains, or by community discussion. Infanticide,
abortion, and the rights of women may vary with
historical era, ethnicity, or religious belief.
In the minds of some, all of these differences
militate against the possibility of a universal ethic
of medicine. Medical ethics, they would say, is
whatever we make it to be. It can be socially constructed differently in different societies and times.
What is morally right for one may be wrong for
another. Pluralism is a fact and it is anachronistic
to seek a common foundation even for medical ethics. This is the thrust of antifoundationalism, the
trend of so-called postmodern philosophy and ethics that denies the possibility of any stable set of
moral precepts.
In medicine, at least, antifoundationalism flies
in the face of the human experience of illness, which
is common across cultures and time. The phenomena do not change. They are common to humans
18
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
whether they lived in ancient Greece, live in the
United States today, or will live in a space station
in the future. A broken leg, a crushing chest pain,
spitting blood, or chills and fever induce anxiety,
fear, distress, vulnerability, and a need and call for
help. The Hippocratic physician, today’s internist,
tomorrow’s flight surgeon on a space station, or the
shaman in a distant era or country, each confronts
a human in need of help. The methods may differ,
but the end of medicine is the same in each case:
healing, helping, relieving pain and anxiety, and
curing when possible. These phenomena of being
ill, being healed, and healing, itself, transcend time
and culture. They ground the ethics of the patient–
physician relationship in universal human experiences even though cultural and historical settings
may differ.
A Common Ethics for the Health Professions
This chapter has concentrated on the ethics of the
profession of medicine. Only analogically has it
touched the ethics of the other health professions
such as nursing, dentistry, medical social work,
clinical psychology, pharmacy, and allied health.
Each of these clinical professions confronts human
beings in the state of illness; each deals with the
same fundamental phenomena of illness and healing. The same virtues, principles, and duties that
bind the physician bind these other clinicians in
their clinical encounters with sick persons seeking
help.
The common foundation for the ethics of the
health professions is the empirical reality of the
human relationship between patients and health
professionals—the internal morality described
above. This common ground of empirical fact
speaks for a common ethic of the clinical healing
relationship. To be sure, upon this common base
there will be certain additional obligations specific
to each profession, and expressed in their different
codes of professional ethics. But a common thread
runs through all these codes. The ethics of the healing relationship is, in the end, the general ethic of
the health professions. Its foundation will be the
same for physicians, nurses, dentists, social workers, psychologists, allied health professionals, and
healthcare administrators. That foundation will be,
as always, the varied phenomena of the human encounter between one human in distress seeking help
from another who professes willingness to help,
possesses the technical and moral skill to do so, and
promises to use them for the good of the person
seeking help.
CONCLUSION
In the chapters immediately following this one, the
rich theoretical foundation for the patient–physician
relationship will be explored, with a particular focus
on the clinical setting. Then, using the tools of research
methodology, we will explore the many overall influences on the patient–physician relationship.
This chapter opened by noting that medical ethics begins and ends in the patient–physician relationship, whether that is in a civilian or military
setting. Thus the point was made that in many respects military physicians do not differ from their
civilian medical counterparts. The military physician, as a physician, is distinguished from other
military personnel by his engagement in a special
kind of human relationship that, of its nature, demands a certain level of moral commitment. That
commitment must be the determinant of the
physician’s conduct even in the extraordinary circumstances of national defense and war. The extent
to which these exigencies may shape those moral
commitments is explored in the many other chapters in this work on the subject of military medical
ethics. What is inescapable is the fact that the physician cannot avoid complicity if harm comes to his
or her patient. The good of the patient is, as always,
the gold standard of moral propriety.
REFERENCES
1.
Shorter E. History of the doctor–patient relationship. In: Bynum WF, Porter R, eds. Companion Encyclopedia of
the History of Medicine. Vol 2. London: Routledge; 1993: 783–800.
2.
Edelstein L. The Hippocratic physician. In: Temkin O, Temkin CL, eds. Temkin CL, trans. Ancient Medicine:
Selected Papers of Ludwig Edelstein. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1967: 87–110.
3.
Carrick P. Medical Ethics in Antiquity: Philosophical Perspectives on Abortion and Euthanasia. Dordrecht & Boston:
D Reidel; 1985: 69–94.
19
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
4.
Baker R. History of medical ethics. In: Bynum WF, Porter R, eds. Companion Encyclopedia of the History of Medicine. Vol 2. London: Routledge; 1993: 852–887.
5.
Temkin O. Hippocrates in a World of Pagans and Christians. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1991.
6.
Amundsen DW. Medicine, Society, and Faith in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins
University Press; 1996.
7.
Kottek SS, Leibowitz JO, Richler B. A Hebrew paraphrase of the Hippocratic Oath (from a fifteenth century
manuscript). Med Hist. 1978;22(4):438–445.
8.
Bulger RJ, ed. Hippocrates Revisited: A Search for Meaning. New York: Medcom Press; 1973.
9.
Hippocrates. In: Hippocrates. Vol 1. Jones WHS, trans-ed. Cambridge, Mass: Loeb Classical Library/Harvard
University Press; 1972: 299–301, 313–333.
10.
Hippocrates. In: Hippocrates. Vol 2. Jones WHS, trans-ed. Cambridge, Mass: Loeb Classical Library/Harvard
University Press; 1972: 263–265, 279–301, 311–313.
11.
American Medical Association. Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Code of Medical Ethics, Current Opinions
With Annotations. 1996–1997 ed. Chicago: American Medical Association; 1997.
12.
Crawshaw R, Rogers DE, Pellegrino ED, et al. Patient–physician covenant. JAMA. 1995;273(19):1553.
13.
Kevorkian J. Prescription-Medicide: The Goodness of Planned Death. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books; 1991.
14.
Wanzer SH, Federman DD, Adelstein SJ, et al. The physician’s responsibility toward hopelessly ill patients: A
second look. N Engl J Med. 1989:320(13):844–849.
15.
Robin ED, McCauley RF. Cultural lag and the Hippocratic Oath. Lancet. 1995;345(8962):1422–1424.
16.
Pellegrino ED. Bioethics as an interdisciplinary enterprise: Where does ethics fit in the mosaic of disciplines?
In: Carson RA, Burns CR, eds. Philosophy of Medicine and Bioethics: A Twenty-Year Retrospective and Critical Appraisal. Dordrecht, Boston, & London: Kluwer; 1997: 1–23.
17.
Meilaender GC. Body, Soul, and Bioethics. Indianapolis, Ind: University of Notre Dame Press; 1995.
18.
Docherty T, ed. Post Modernism: A Reader. New York: Columbia University Press; 1993.
19.
Rorty R. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1979.
20.
Rosen S. The Ancients and the Moderns: Rethinking Modernity. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press; 1989.
21.
Engelhardt HT Jr. The Foundations of Bioethics. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996.
22.
Moreno JD. Deciding Together: Bioethics and Moral Consensus. New York: Oxford University Press; 1995.
23.
Singer P. Rethinking Life and Death: The Collapse of Our Traditional Ethics. New York: St Martin’s Press; 1995.
24.
Lain Entralgo P. Doctor and Patient. Partridge F, trans. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1969.
25.
Lain Entralgo P. La Relación Médico-Enfermo: Historia y Teoría. Madrid: Revista del Occidente; 1964.
26.
Seldin D. The medical model: Biomedical science as the basis of medicine. In: Beyond Tomorrow: Trends and
Prospects in Medical Science. New York: Rockefeller University Press; 1977.
20
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
27.
Bayles MD. Physicians as body mechanics. In: Caplan AL, Engelhardt HT Jr, McCartney JJ, eds. Concepts of
Health and Disease: Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, Advanced Book Program, World
Science Division; 1981: 665–675.
28.
Hall M. The ethics of health care rationing. Public Aff Q. 1994;8(1):33–50.
29.
Emanuel EJ, Dubler NN. Preserving the physician–patient relationship in the era of managed care. JAMA.
1995;273(4):323–329.
30.
Engelhardt HT Jr, Rie MA. Morality for the medical-industrial complex: A code of ethics for the mass marketing of health care. N Engl J Med. 1988;319(16):1086–1089.
31.
Balint M. The Doctor, His Patient, and the Illness. New York: International Universities Press; 1964.
32.
Pellegrino ED. Societal duty and moral complicity: The physician’s dilemma of divided loyalty. Int J Law Psychiatry. 1993;16(3–4):371–391.
33.
Kant I. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. Paton HJ, trans. New York: Harper; 1964.
34.
Mill JS. Mill’s Ethical Writings. Schneewind JB, ed. New York: Collier; 1965.
35.
Aristotle. Nicomachean ethics. In: Ross WD, trans; Urmson JO, rev; Barnes J, ed. The Complete Works of Aristotle:
The Revised Oxford Translation. Vol 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1984: 1229–1867.
36.
Aquinas T. Summa Theologiae. Hughes WD, trans-ed. New York: McGraw-Hill & Blackfriars; 1969: 62, 137–149.
37.
Jonsen AR, Toulmin SE. The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral Reasoning. Berkeley: University of California
Press; 1988.
38.
Finnis J. Natural Law and Natural Rights. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1980.
39.
Gustafson JF. The Contribution of Theology to Medical Ethics. Milwaukee, Minn: Marquette; 1975.
40.
Jakobovits I. Jewish Medical Ethics: A Comparative and Historical Study of the Jewish Religious Attitude to Medicine
and Its Practice. New York: Bloch Publishing; 1975.
41.
Rosner F, Bleich JD, eds. Jewish Bioethics. New York: Hebrew Publishing Co; 1979.
42.
Rawls J. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1971.
43.
Sartre JP. Cahiers pour une Morale [Notebooks for an Ethics]. Paris: Gallimard; 1983.
44.
Nussbaum MC. The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Tragedy and Philosophy. New York: Cambridge
University Press; 1986.
45.
Noddings N. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. Berkeley: University of California
Press; 1984.
46.
Frazier E, Hornsby J, Lovibond S, eds. Ethics: A Feminist Reader. Cambridge, Mass: Blackwell; 1992.
47.
Pellegrino ED. The Lived World of Doctor and Patient. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press; 2000.
48.
Unschuld PU. Medical Ethics in Imperial China: A Study in Historical Anthropology. Berkeley: University of California Press; 1979.
49.
Caraka Samhita 3. 8. 13-14 as cited in D Wujastyk. Indian medicine. In: WF Bynum, R Porter, eds. Companion
Encyclopedia of the History of Medicine. Vol 1. London: Routledge; 1993: 762.
21
The Moral Foundations of the Patient–Physician Relationship: The Essence of Medical Ethics
50.
Percival T. Medical Ethics, or A Code of Institutes and Precepts Adapted to the Professional Conduct of Physicians and
Surgeons. Reprinted from the 1803 version. Birmingham, Ala: Classics of Medicine Library; 1985.
51.
Veatch RM, Mason CM. Hippocratic versus Judeo-Christian medical ethics: Principles in conflict. J Religious
Ethics. 1987;15(1):86–105.
52.
Glare RGW, ed. Oxford Latin Dictionary. Cambridge: Oxford University Press; 1983.
53.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. For the Patient’s Good: The Restoration of Beneficence in Health Care. New York:
Oxford University Press; 1988.
54.
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1994.
55.
Aristotle. Nicomachean ethics. In: McKeon R, ed. The Basic Works of Aristotle. New York: Random House; 1941.
56.
Pellegrino ED. The virtuous physician and the ethics of medicine. In: Shelp EE, ed. Virtue and Medicine: Explorations in the Character of Medicine. Philosophy and Medicine. Vol 17. Dordrecht, Holland: D Reide Publishing Co;
1985: 237–255.
57.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. The Virtues in Medical Practice. New York: Oxford University Press; 1993.
58.
Pieper J. The Four Cardinal Virtues: Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance. Winston R, Winston C, trans. New
York: Harcourt Brace & World; 1965.
59.
Cooper JM. Reason and Human Good in Aristotle. Indianapolis, Ind: Hackett Publishing Co; 1986: 63–64.
60.
Pellegrino ED. Toward a virtue-based normative ethics for the health professions. Kennedy Inst Ethics J.
1995;5(3):253–277.
61.
Hippocrates. On the art. In: Hippocrates. Vol 2. WHS Jones, trans-ed. Cambridge, Mass: The Loeb Classical
Library/Harvard University Press; 1981: 193.
62.
Glick SM. Unlimited human autonomy—a cultural bias? N Engl J Med. 1997;336(13):954–956.
63.
Surbone A. Truth telling to the patient. JAMA. 1992;268(13):1661–1662.
22
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
