Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
267
MILITARY MEDICAL ETHICS
VOLUME I
SECTION III: THE SYNTHESIS OF MEDICINE AND THE MILITARY
Section Editor:
EDMUND G. HOWE, MD, JD
Director, Programs in Ethics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Chair, Committee of Department of Defense Ethics Consultants to the Surgeons General
Robert Benney
Flashlight Surgery
Saipan
Doctors performing brain surgery by flashlight during a blackout necessitated by a Japanese air raid. The austerity of
the surroundings is evident in the lack of medical equipment and supplies.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
268
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
269
Chapter 10
PHYSICIAN-SOLDIER: A MORAL
PROFESSION
WILLIAM MADDEN, MD*; AND BRIAN S. CARTER, MD, FAAP†
INTRODUCTION
OVERVIEW: THE PROFESSIONS AND SOCIETY
THE PROFESSION OF MEDICINE
Ethics in Medicine
The Roles of the Physician
The Goals of Medicine in the Presence of Disease and Death
THE PROFESSION OF ARMS
Ethics in the Military
The Roles of the Military Professional
The Goals of the Military Professional and the Impact of Violence and
Destruction
PROFESSIONAL SIMILARITIES BETWEEN MEDICINE AND THE MILITARY
THE PHYSICIAN-SOLDIER: PROVIDING MEDICAL CARE AND
CONSERVING LIVES
Understanding the Principle of Conservation
The Evolution of Conservation as Metaphor
Beyond the Metaphor of Conservation
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, United States Army; formerly, Commander, Medical Element, Joint Task Force Bravo, Soto Cano Air Force
Base, Comayagua, Honduras (1989); currently, Associate Professor of Clinical Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics and Steele Memorial
Children’s Research Center, College of Medicine, University of Arizona, 1501 North Campbell Avenue, Tucson, Arizona 85724
†Currently Associate Professor, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University, A-0126 Medical Center North, Nashville, Tennessee 372322370; formerly, Lieutenant Colonel, Medical Corps, United States Army Reserve, Department of Pediatrics, Walter Reed Army Medical
Center, Washington, DC 20307
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
270
John Wehrle
Dustoff at Tan Son Nhut
Vietnam, 1966
Just as the wounded soldier moves along a pathway from injury, to triage, to care, to recovery, military physicians
need to travel along their own pathway of understanding themselves as both physician and soldier. Available at:
http://history.amedd.army.mil/art/vietnam_files/dustofftsn.jpg.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
271
INTRODUCTION
litical ends of society by enhancing its military capability. Their actions increase their military’s ability to destroy and kill. By having physicians in the
military, societies ask, even order, physicians to be
a part of a system whose means is a direct cause of
an incomprehensible amount of injury, illness, pain,
suffering, and death.
Physicians are made a part of that military system in a very formal way. They are sworn in as
members of the profession of arms, taking the same
oath as those who lead in combat. They wear the
same uniform, have the same rank and title system
as other soldiers, and are given the privileges
granted by society to the profession of arms. These
physician-soldiers also take at least rudimentary
training in basic military skills and are issued a
weapon when there is a threat to their well-being.
Despite being declared “noncombatants” by modern rules of war, members of the medical profession have on occasion both killed and been killed
during battle. Without question, they are in the
military. Military medical professionals cannot
separate themselves from the ends and means of
that force.
Thus military physicians are members of two
different professions that appear, at least on initial
analysis, to be in conflict. The profession of medicine uses the resources of society to relieve pain and
suffering and to prevent the early death of members of society. The profession of arms uses the collective efforts of individual members of the society
to benefit society as a whole by threatening or perpetrating violence, with resultant pain, suffering,
and death of individuals. Their relationships, obligations, and responsibilities appear to be contradictory, even mutually exclusive. How then can one
be both physician and soldier?
Parrish1 believes that a physician cannot be a
soldier because the two professions have a different set of values. We posit, however, that the values are not that different. How can this difference
of perception be resolved? It can be done by exploring the essence of the professions. That part of the
discipline of philosophy that studies values, what
is right or wrong, good or bad, is called ethics. In
ethical theory one’s moral world is called ethos.
Thus, if the question of being both physician and
soldier is to be explored then it is necessary to explore the ethos of the two professions and see if they
are in fundamental conflict. If the ethical relationship between the two professions is to be developed, it is necessary to first understand the ethos of
professions themselves.
The medical profession is asked by society to
prevent and treat illness and injury, and the pain
and suffering that they cause. The professional
oaths of medicine, from antiquity to modern times,
have prevented medical professionals from being
agents of death. Professional, civil, and criminal
sanctions have also been used historically to prevent members of the medical profession from becoming involved in activities that led to the deaths
of members of their society. Conversely, the profession of arms is tasked with defending members of
that society by becoming directly involved in activities that lead to the wounding or death of others. How does a physician become a member of a
profession that can and will use violence to achieve
goals? How does one become a physician-soldier?
Parrish notes that,
[m]aking doctors into soldiers was difficult, maybe
impossible, because of the value judgments learned
in our schooling and in our caring for the ill. Making
doctors of soldiers would probably be easier…. 1(p9)
Physicians have “gone to war” for thousands of
years. This is made necessary by the nature of war.
The “end” or goal of war is to achieve control over
others, generally for political advantage. The
“means” or method of achieving this control is violence; violence that results in the wounding and
death of many. Weapon systems have been perfected to take maximum advantage of human vulnerabilities, whether those be organic (ways to kill
or maim) or psychic (ways to traumatize and render troops unable to continue the battle). The circumstances or ecology of war also increase the risk
of disease. Large numbers of people are brought
together, providing an increased risk of infectious
diseases. Inadequate and contaminated food and
water supplies, the stresses of battle, and poor hygiene, to name just a few, all lead to illness and
death. Travel to faraway locales results in exposure
to new types of infections, providing an increased
risk of both acquiring and dying of diseases. Changes
in sexual behavior and the opportunity for new
partners results in increases in the incidence of sexually transmitted disease. Thus, both the weaponry
and the environment of war bring suffering and
death.
When injured, ill, or overwhelmed, a soldier can
no longer contribute to military victory. By treating the wounded and other casualties, military physicians enhance their military’s ability to wage war.
Thus, military medical professionals serve the poMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
272
OVERVIEW: THE PROFESSIONS AND SOCIETY
for safeguarding and teaching the religious values
that help form the moral basis for societies. And,
finally, members of the military profession secure
the safety and viability of the society in which all
professions exist.
Professions exist to serve society, but such service also requires sacrifice. Benefit to the profession,
or to its individual members, is a secondary effect
of the profession’s primary function. In return for
their special status, members of professions are expected to place the needs of society ahead of their
personal needs. When professionals fail to remember their special place as servants of society, and
act primarily to benefit themselves as individuals or
as a group, then they have broken the implied contract that establishes their privileged place in society’s
structure. In doing so they threaten their special status as professionals, individually or collectively.
It can be argued that a secondary role of the professions is to serve as a moral example to the rest of
society. A professional, by fulfilling this obligation,
reminds citizens of the necessity for each member
of society, as a citizen of that society, to dedicate
some portion of his life’s work to the benefit of society as a whole. Citizens’ lives are enhanced by
membership in society. If they are to accept the benefits, they are morally bound by justice to accept
the responsibilities of being a citizen. Professionals, acting out their roles, model this behavior.
Historically, the collective memberships of the
professions have also seen themselves as responsible for maintaining the personal moral values of
their members. Proper interpersonal relationships
were codified by Percival in the first modern medical code. 3 The Uniform Code of Military Justice allows for charges to be brought against military officers, for example, for “conduct unbecoming an
officer.”4(Art134) Officers have been removed from
positions of authority because of their failure to
uphold moral standards. Thus, by acting out their
professional lives and living as moral members of
society, professionals and the professions to which
they belong help form the moral underpinning of
the societies that they serve.
The existence and the role of the professions, then,
is defined by the service that they are to supply to the
society. This service defines the corporate responsibility of the profession and its discrete, specialized
body of knowledge. The client of each profession is
society either as a collective or its individual members. The ethos of each profession is the values that
define for the profession and the professionals their
individual and collective rights and responsibilities.
Profession: a vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of learning or science is
used in its application to the affairs of others or in
the practice of the art founded upon it; applied especially to the three learned professions; divinity,
law and medicine, also to the military profession. 2
Modern societies are complex human organizations that exist to benefit their individual members
through an intricate sharing of risks and benefits,
rights and responsibilities. Within societies members take on a variety of roles at the same time and
various roles over the course of their lifetimes. All
societies have occupational roles that are set apart
because of their special qualities. Some of these specialized roles are called professions.
The term professional means more than just doing something for financial compensation. Huntington described three characteristics of professions
that separate them from vocations: (1) corporateness,
(2) expertise, and (3) responsibility. These terms define the essential elements of modern professions.
Like the societies they serve, the professions are
complex organizations. The classic professions of
law, medicine, and religion are fundamental professions and provide examples of the essential professional attributes. Their corporateness allows them
to provide a specific service, essential to the needs
of society. The American Bar Association, the American Medical Association, and the hierarchical structures of the various religious denominations are
simply the most visible portion of the complex organizational systems that define the roles of their
respective professions and the relationships between each of them.
Every profession has a unique expertise that both
defines and empowers it. Professions select, educate, and formally accept candidate members. The
movement of individuals into the professional subculture is in part a rite of passage, a process by
which the neophytes learn and accept the unique
culture of their profession. By having generations
of professionals go through a similar acculturation
experience, both the profession and society can be
assured that those values necessary for the functioning of the profession will be maintained.
Each profession also has a fundamental responsibility to provide society with an essential service.
The profession of law manages the legal foundations that guide the interactions between members
of society. Medicine in its broadest role is responsible for the physical and mental health of society.
Members of the religious profession are responsible
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
273
THE PROFESSION OF MEDICINE
But first We must speak of man’s rights. Man has
the right to live. He has the right to bodily integrity
and to the means necessary for the proper development of life, particularly food, clothing, shelter,
medical care, rest, and, finally, the necessary social
services. 5(¶11)
The profession of medicine is among the oldest
of the professions. There is archaeological evidence
of the practice of the healing arts dating back 30,000
years. The oldest written records of medical practice are from Egypt, dating back to 3500 BC. The first
physician known by name was Imhotep, who practiced in about 3000 BC. (The Greeks later deified him
as the god Asklepios, also referred to as Aesculapius.) The first healthcare system was probably
in Mesopotamia at the time of King Hammurabi,
about 2000 BC. It was well enough developed to have
both a fee schedule and malpractice claims. 6 Physicians have been doing what they do for a long time.
The profession of medicine is composed of an
organized group of men and women (corporateness),
with a common, formalized body of knowledge (expertise), dedicated to a common societal role (responsibility). The profession of medicine seeks to help
individual citizens, and the society as a whole, to
achieve the physical and mental well-being necessary to contribute to and partake in the benefits of
society, benefits whose foundation is the basic values of the society.
Ethics in Medicine
Today’s physician does not take a formal oath of
allegiance to society or to the individual patient,
although once physicians agree to provide care they
take on a legal and moral duty to do so. However,
the profession of medicine in the Western world
does have a formal code of ethics, dating back to
the Oath of Hippocrates. According to Veatch7 there
are two ethical principals that are central to the
Hippocratic tradition.
First, the physician is to act to benefit his individual patient. This principle is found in numerous codes throughout history, including the Oath
of Hippocrates,8 Percival’s code (the first modern
code written in 18th century England),3 and in both
the Declaration of Geneva (1948)9 and in the World
Medical Association’s International Code of Medical Ethics (1964). 10 The Hippocratic tradition calls
for the use of the resources of society, as directed
by the medical professional, to be used to benefit
the individual. It is only in this century that the
physician’s role to society as a whole has been a
formal part of the Hippocratic tradition. The 1957
version of the American Medical Association
(AMA) Principles states: “The honored ideals of the
medical profession imply that the responsibilities
of the physician extend not only to the individual,
but also to society…”11(p3) However, this has been
deemphasized in the most current version of the
code, published in 2001: “A physician shall recognize a responsibility to participate in activities contributing to the improvement of the community and
the betterment of public health.”12(¶VII) The use of
the resources of society by the physician to benefit
the individual remains central to the formally stated
ethical principles of physicians in the United States.
The second central ethic of the Hippocratic tradition is paternalism. Physicians are seen as being
best suited to determine what is in their patient’s
best interests. Dr. Benjamin Rush, signer of the Declaration of Independence and a proponent of the
demystification of medicine, argued that physicians
should “yield to them [patients] in matters of little
consequence, but maintain an inflexible authority
over them in matters that are essential to life.”13(p65)
In an essay entitled “On the Duties of Patients to
Their Physicians,” he further stated: “The obedience
of a patient, to the prescriptions of his physician
should be prompt, strict and universal. He should
never impose his own inclination or judgment to
the advice of the physician.”13(p65)
The current “Principles of Medical Ethics” of the
AMA calls for the physician to respect the rights
“of patients, colleagues, and other health professionals…”12(¶IV) It also states that “[a] physician
shall be dedicated to providing competent medical
care, with compassion and respect for human
dignity.”12(¶I) This is clearly less paternalistic, but
these principles still allow the physician the ultimate decision of what he will or will not do. “A
physician shall, in the provision of appropriate patient care, except in emergencies, be free to choose
whom to serve, with whom to associate, and the
environment in which to provide care.”12(¶VI)
How physicians act out their roles has evolved
greatly as a result of the combined effects of a changing understanding of the origin of disease and the
role of science in providing the clinician with effective therapies. For most of human history medicine
and surgery as they are known today did not exist.
Safe and effective surgery was not possible until the
development of anesthesia in the 1840s and the use
of antisepsis in the 1850s. Safe and effective medicine is a post–World-War-II phenomenon. Lewis
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
274
Thomas, writing about his medical education in the
1930s, states:
But the purpose of the curriculum was…to teach
recognition of disease entities, their classification,
their signs, symptoms and laboratory manifestations, and how to make an accurate diagnosis. The
treatment of disease was the most minor part of
the curriculum, almost left out altogether…. 14(p40)
The Roles of the Physician
If the foundation of modern medicine is such a
new phenomenon, then what was the basis of medical practice for 30,000 years? Historically there are
three fundamental roles that the physician has occupied: (1) physician as priest, (2) physician as philosopher, and (3) physician as scientist. Which role
is operative has been determined by the understanding of the patients and their physicians on the
nature of disease.
For most of the history of mankind the scientific
foundation of physical and biological phenomenon
was not known. Man could neither understand nor
control the world in which he struggled to survive.
The forces of nature were seen as the power of the
“unknown.” Disease was understood to be a sign
of disharmony with magical or transcendental
forces. Healing was seen as a manifestation of the
restoration of a harmonious relationship with the
supernatural. Death was a consequence of the loss
of the supernatural or spiritual component of man—
his soul.
When the cause of illness is supernatural the clinicians’ ability to influence the course of disease
depends upon specialized knowledge and relationship with the “unknown.” Knowledge gave
power—the power to heal. There was no objective
power, no ability to cure. But there was profound
subjective power, the ability to help patients see
themselves as better. This power was derived from,
and dependent upon, the community’s belief in the
clinician’s abilities. Belief was the foundation of the
power to heal.
With the coming of the ancient Greek civilization there developed the concept that the natural
world was knowable, and controllable, through the
natural faculties of man—observation, reflection,
and reason. The possibility of man being able to
control his destiny through experience and reason,
not prayer and sacrifice, was critical in the development of all science, including the science of medicine. Empirical science was born, and with it empirical medicine.
One must attend in medical practice not primarily
to plausible theories, but to experience combined
with reason….Now I approve of theorizing also if
it lays its foundation in facts and deduces its conclusions in concordance with phenomenon. 15(p154)
Greek medicine saw disease as resulting from
disharmony within the patient, or between the patient and the natural world. Writing on epilepsy
Hippocrates said:
Men regard its nature and cause as divine from ignorance and wonder. But the brain is the cause of
this disease, as it is the cause of every other great
disease. 15(p154)
Empiricism provided a framework for explaining natural phenomenon within the natural order,
making it accessible to observation and reason. The
structure allowed it to be organized and written
down, and thus it could be taught in a systematic
fashion. Perhaps most importantly, it established a
framework that allowed for growth and development of the body of knowledge. Health and disease
controlled by supernatural forces meant that the
question of their control could not be approached
directly. The priest-physician could only heal
through the power of the “unknown.” The empiricist-physician had the potential of learning to deal
with the problems of injury and illness directly.
With the development of the scientific method,
science moved from subjective observation and reasoning to objective experimentation. Objective science provides the means to understand, diagnose,
and treat disease. At best the physician-priest and
the physician-philosopher sought healing, that is,
subjective improvement. The physician as scientist
seeks to bring about objective cure.
Historically, then, physicians have operated in
different ways—as priest, as empiricist, and as scientist—to meet their professional responsibility of
healer and ultimately curer in their community.
Although appearing at first view to be distinct and
noncomplementary, these various modalities must
merge if clinicians are to fulfill their role. This
complementary nature derives from the basic essence of medicine as both a science and an art. As
scientist, the clinician offers the chance for objective treatment and, hopefully, cure to his patients.
As an empiricist, the clinician seeks to apply objective therapies to the unique physiology of the patient seeking help. And as priest, the clinician seeks
to understand the psychological and sociological
context of the particular patient and how it influences the disease process.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
275
The Goals of Medicine in the Presence of Disease and Death
These three modalities of the physician fit well
the three principal goals of the profession of medicine: (1) prevention whenever possible; (2) curative
treatment when prevention fails; and (3) healing,
the relief of pain and suffering, when specific treatment will not benefit the patient. Each of these
goals—prevention, curing, and healing—can only
be understood and achieved through the combined
efforts of the physician and patient. The physician
acts without effect if he does not act in concert with
the patient. The patient and physician must work
together to achieve a common understanding, albeit at different levels, of the nature of the patient’s
concerns, their cause, and accepted modalities of
effective prevention, treatment, or amelioration.
The practice of medicine in its broadest sense includes
the whole relationship of the physician with his
patient. It is an art, based to an increasing extent on
the medical sciences, but comprising much that remains outside the realm of any science. The art of
medicine and the science of medicine are not antagonistic, but supplementary to each other…. 16(p88)
From the first clinical encounter the doctor-in-themaking is exposed to human secrets that are not available outside of the profession. The young physician
first stands at the sidelines and then is drawn into
the inner circle as his knowledge and skills allow.
This is the physician’s privilege: to be lifted out of
the dross of common days in order to experience
such clarity of feelings. The intensity of birth and
death, pleasure and sorrow as expressed in the lives
of others has the power to nullify personal boundaries in sudden communion…. 17(p147)
The sharing of these experiences results in relationships that may be profoundly important for
both the patient and the practitioner. The central
role that relationships have in the practice of medicine is shown by their central place in physician’s
codes from antiquity to the present. The physician
is first bound to other members of his or her profession:
To hold him who has taught me this art as equal to
my parents and to live my life in partnership with
him, and if he is in need of money to give him a
share of mine, and to regard his offspring as equal
to my brothers in male lineage and to teach them
this art—if they desire to learn it—without fee and
covenant. 8(p3)
The very complexity of modern medicine also
binds them together. Modern medicine is a corporate exercise. No single healthcare professional is
capable of doing all that is necessary to provide
healthcare to an individual patient or to a population. The body of knowledge is too great, and the
technological skills too many and too varied for one
physician to master. Science-based medicine demands all the efforts of a community of individuals, seen and unseen, acknowledged and not acknowledged, for success. Physicians are also bound
to their patients by the experiences that they share:
What I may see or hear in the course of the treatment or even outside of the treatment in regard to
the life of men, which on no account one must
spread abroad, I will keep to myself holding such
things shameful to be spoken about. 8(p3)
For some physicians the realities of the medical
professional’s role forces them to distance themselves forever from those whom they seek to serve.
For others, there develops a profound sense of their
role that bonds them ever closer to their patient—
not as family, not as friend, but as doctor.
No, for me fulfillment comes from the sudden intimacies with total strangers—those moments when
the human barrier cracks open to revel what is most
secret and inarticulate. A word can betray the deepest emotion. A look can reflect a world of feeling. Illness strips away superficiality to reveal reality in
etched detail. The revelation can fuse together disparate lives in unexpected kinship. Is it the fear of
death, the dreaded pain, the sorrow, or the loss?17(p148)
Physicians do not create life, but they are involved with the mother in assuring that the creative
process is successful. Physicians do not determine
the quality of their patient’s lives, but they have the
power to greatly influence that quality, both for the
good and the bad. Lastly, physicians do not kill, but
they often directly influence both the timing of
death and the quality of the dying process. Physicians are granted by their knowledge and professional position the power to influence the living and
dying of those under their care. Such experiences
can forever change how physicians see themselves
and the world in which they live and work.
The profession of medicine, like the other classic
professions, exists as a society within the society that
it serves. Its fundamental role is to provide for the
healthcare needs of the society. In order to accomplish this it must work both with individual patients
and members of other professions. Historically, the
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
276
strongest bond of the physician is not to the society, but to the individual patient. In general, the
physician decides how the resources of society will
be used to advance healthcare of individual patients. The physician takes no oath of obedience to
higher authority. Except in emergencies the physician is allowed to remove himself from the care of
a patient should he wish to do so. The physician is
at some risk from the stress of dealing on a regular
basis with the issues of birth, injury, illness, and
death. However, the risks to the physician are minimal compared to those of the professional soldier.
THE PROFESSION OF ARMS
Profession is the correct word for the calling of the career officer today…. 18(p147)
Of the four classic professions—law, medicine,
ministry, and arms—the profession of arms is the
youngest. Societies have always competed. Indeed,
the use of violence to achieve political gains predates recorded history. Throughout history men
have made war their life’s occupation. In general,
membership in the ruling classes determined who
would lead in battle. There was no true profession
of arms as it is defined here. Mercenary armies were
organized, fought, and were then disbanded. But
there was no group of citizens, formally educated
in warfare, who dedicated their lives to ensuring
the political security of their respective societies.
Soldiers for pay existed, but not professional soldiers.
It was not until the beginning of the 19th century that the profession of arms, as it is known today, came into existence in Western culture. It came
into being when changes in governments, their
armies, military technology, and the tactics of war
combined to make a professional officer corps necessary. War simply became too complicated for
amateurs. 19
Ethics in the Military
In the United States the profession of arms, like
the profession of medicine, is manifested by a group
of men and women dedicated to a common purpose (corporateness). Through education and training the profession’s members become skilled in the
art and science of warfare (expertise). Their goal is
to provide for the security of their client state and
to provide it with the means to extend its political
will through the use of threatened or actual violence
(responsibility). Their dedication to the service of
their society is shown by their willingness to sacrifice their lives in order to meet their society’s political-military goals. Their willingness to take on
this burden is formally expressed in the oath that
they take (Exhibit 10-1, Figure 10-1).
In taking this oath, military professionals do not
swear to defend the physical boundaries of their
country, although that would surely be required
were they threatened. Instead they promise to support and defend the Constitution of the United
States—the body of laws that delineate the legal
structure and moral values upon which the United
States is based.
The Declaration of Independence asserted that
the signatories, as representatives of many other
colonists, no longer shared the moral values of the
British government. It further expressed the fundamental values that would define the new nation.
The Constitution of the United States (including the
Bill of Rights, and later amendments to the Constitution) further defined and guaranteed those core
values. The US Constitution is the formal expression of who Americans are as a nation and what
EXHIBIT 10-1
THE OATH OF ENLISTMENT/REENLISTMENT INTO THE ARMED FORCES OF
THE UNITED STATES (REGULAR AND
RESERVE COMPONENTS)
[For swearing officer: Repeat each line, then
allow applicant(s) to repeat.]
I, (State your full name)
Do solemnly swear (or affirm)
That I will Support and Defend
The Constitution of the United States
Against all enemies
Foreign and domestic;
That I will bear true faith
And allegiance to the same;
And that I will obey
The orders of the President of the United States
And the orders of the Officers
Appointed over me,
According to regulations
And the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
So help me God.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
277
Americans stand for. By acting to protect and defend the Constitution, members of the United States
military are acting to protect and defend the fundamental values of their society.
The requirement for absolute obedience to the
hierarchy that is expressed in the military oath has,
at times, been held in disdain in the United States
because of the limits that it places on individual
freedom of choice and action. However, such a requirement is essential. The profession of arms has
at its command sufficient force to destroy what it is
meant to protect. A military profession that does
not swear allegiance to lawful civil authority is ultimately more of a threat to, than it is a protector
of, its society.
The Roles of the Military Professional
In practice, the duty of the professional soldier
to protect his society and its fundamental values
presents the military professional with specific responsibilities. Huntington, in an essay entitled “The
Military Mind,” defines three distinct roles for the
professional soldier as a servant of society. He is to
be: (1) a counselor to his client government, (2) an
executor for the military requirements of his nation,
and (3) the spokesman for the military needs resulting from political decisions. These three roles provide the means by which the military professional
meets his professional responsibility to society. 20(p37)
The price to society of incompetence or failure
in each of these roles is high. If the senior military
professionals fail to adequately counsel their governments, the very existence of their nations may
be threatened. As the executor of military plans, the
professional soldier who fails to adequately train,
supply, and lead his forces, leads them to failure.
Their individual lives are wasted and the threat to
the client nation is increased, not decreased. Lastly,
as spokesman for the military, the soldier must be
reasoned in his request for the resources of society.
If they are overzealous in seeking support for military programs, their country may spend itself into
political decline. Thus, the military professional
carries a great responsibility whether he performs
as counselor, executor, or spokesman in military
security matters.
The soldier, unlike any other professional, is expected to risk his physical and mental well-being
or individual freedom when necessary to achieve
his society’s political goals. He can be wounded,
killed, or captured. This requirement is clearly
spelled out in the following excerpts from the Code
of Conduct for Members of the Armed Forces of the
United States:
I am an American, fighting in the forces which
guard my country and our way of life. I am prepared to give my life in their defense. 21(Art1)
I will never surrender of my own free will. If in
command I will never surrender the members of
my command while they still have the means to
resist. 21(Art2)
The Goals of the Military Professional and the
Impact of Violence and Destruction
The risk to the soldier is not just to his physical
health and well-being. The milieu of the profession
continues the acculturation process of the professional soldier, and may result in an experience—
the battlefield—that greatly alters his view of the
world and his role in it.
Perhaps it should not be written or said, but the
battlefield can be a place of frightening beauty and
fierce love…. No other venture reveals as much
about the condition we call life, the mystery we call
death…. 22(pw23)
Many veterans who are honest with themselves will
admit, I believe, that the experience of communal
effort in battle…has been the high point of their
lives…. Despite the horror, the weariness, the
Fig. 10-1. “Private Rodrigo Vasquez (left) is sworn into the
US Army by Major General Dennis Cavin as Vasquez’s parents (center) and Secretary of the Army Thomas White (far
right) watch during a ceremony in the Pentagon on September 4, 2001. Vasquez’s enlistment was part of a press
briefing conducted by Cavin and White on the Army meeting its recruiting goals. Cavin is the commanding general,
US Army Recruiting Command. Department of Defense
photograph by Helene C. Stikkel.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
278
grime, and the hatred, participation with others in
the chances of battle had its unforgettable side
which they would not have wanted to have
missed…. 23(p44)
In his volume, The Warriors, Reflections on Men in
Battle,23 Gray listed three enduring appeals of war:
(1) the delight in seeing, (2) the delight in comradeship, and (3) the delight in destruction. These attractions are a continuation of the acculturation process
that is necessary if the professional soldier is to survive and succeed in achieving his government’s
military-political goals.
Because of the intense, primordial environment
in which they exist, the elements of seeing, comradeship, and destruction take on the nature of passions. As passions, they draw men to battle and,
once they are there, lead men to act in ways not otherwise imaginable. These attractions of war are both
the means of victory and the seeds of destruction
for men and armies.
The passion of seeing is a common experience.
In seeing the unique all are drawn to the subject.
There is a desire not only to witness, but to live the
extraordinary. Through first passively, then actively,
experiencing the new reality, the new, the extraordinary, becomes the ordinary. Humans are truly
voyeurs, seeking to journey to a different world.
In war the experience may be so overwhelming
that there is a risk that the soldier, sailor, airman,
or Marine may lose contact with his previous reality. During the Vietnam War, American soldiers
perceived that the world they were then living in
was so different that it became totally distinct from
the world they had left behind. Vietnam was “The
Nam,” the United States was “The World.” They
had literally been sent out of the world.
Over time the soldier moves from being an observer to an active participant in the death and destruction of war. There is a good reason to do this.
The soldier must do so to survive.
And just as the bodies had become a part of the
earth on which they rested, so I had passed during
the battle from being in the war to being part of
the war. I was no longer an alien in a strange environment. I could no longer draw a distinction between the war and my presence in it. The preceding weeks had prepared me, but the battle itself
had caused the final metamorphosis. The war had
become a part of me and I of it. And though my
recognition of that fact was unnerving, I knew that
probably within my transition lay the seeds of my
ultimate survival…. 24(p92)
The next attraction of war is perhaps best described in the phrase, “this band of brothers.” Professional soldiers promise to die in defense of their
society. But in reality men do not die for ideals, they
die for each other.
Numberless soldiers have died, more or less willingly,
not for country or honor or religious faith or any other
abstract good, but because they realized by fleeing
their posts and rescuing themselves, they would expose their companions to greater danger…. 23(p40)
This bonding is integral to any profession, but it is
perhaps most profound in the profession of arms, and
within distinct segments of the profession, as a result
of what the members have experienced together.
These unspeakable experiences bond professional soldiers together in ways that forever change
the lives of those who survive. Part of the postwar
experience for some veterans is a feeling that the
remainder of their life has less validity because it
can not match up to the experience or intensity of
war. The relationships that they developed in combat seem to pale those of civilian life. And the losses
that they experienced in combat are often beyond
their ability to share with civilians or to reconcile
with their own good fortune to have survived. The
note below, left at the Vietnam Memorial, speaks
for many of them.
My dear friends, It is good to touch your names,
your memory, and to visit with you. I’ve struggled
in your absence. I’ve been so angry that you left
me. I miss you so much! I’ve looked for you for so
long. How angry I was to find you here—though I
knew you would be. I’ve wished so hard that I
could have saved you. 25
Now in their civilian lives, they are no longer
bound together by life-or-death struggles. Instead
they live the day-to-day realities, fearing, or perhaps knowing, that what they experienced will
never be duplicated. Thus men are attracted to war,
not just by what they see and by what they do, but
by the relationships that develop when men fight
and die together. War attracts men by the bonds it
forms, bonds that are literally worth killing for, and
dying for. The last attraction is the violence that
leads to all the killing and dying.
The professional soldier, utilizing those under his
command, is the actual means that society uses to
achieve its political goals through the use, or threatened use, of violence. This capacity to commit violence gives the soldier the potential of taking what
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
279
he wants, when he wants, and how he wants. The
actual use of violence by soldiers can result in the
breakdown of other societal limits on behavior. It
is no longer possible, if it ever was, to limit the violence of war to only that which is necessary to
achieve the specific military mission, and thus
achieve the political goals. The emotions that arise
in battle, and the chaos that is integral to combat, assure that the destruction in warfare will, at times, exceed that which is militarily and politically necessary.
War is, at its very core, the absence of order; and
the absence of order leads very easily to the absence of morality, unless the leader can preserve
each of them in its place…. 24(p62)
Therefore, the power of violence can destroy
more than just buildings and bodies. It will distort
and may destroy the moral limits that normally bind
behavior. In the beginning the soldier may have
difficulty accepting the level of violence inherent
to warfare. As time goes on the soldier undergoes a
necessary metamorphosis, necessary both for individual survival and military success. Violence becomes a way of life and, in a bizarre way, of creating new life. Violence gives the soldier the ability
not only to see the world anew, but also to make it
anew. War is about destruction and creation, the life
and death of both individuals and societies.
Ground combat is personal….It is a primordial
struggle….Emotions flow with an intensity unimaginable to the non-participant: fear, hate, passion, desperation. And then—triumph!….The sense
of relief is identified as pleasure in being alive, and
life itself is purchased at the cost of someone else’s
death. Kill or be killed: the emotional result is pleasure at the sight of the enemy dead. Yes, that must
be the reason for the sensation—a celebration of
life…. 24(p159)
Thus men and women are drawn to the profession of arms both by their desire to serve society
and by the inherent attractions of the ultimate
means of the profession—war. War, because of its
tremendous capacity for destruction of property,
lives, and values places both those who fight it, and
the society they fight for, at grave risk.
This, then, is the ethos of the profession of arms. It
is a society within a society. It exists to serve society
by protecting its very foundation, the legal and moral
framework upon which the society is based. Its means
is the threat of force or the actual use of force in direct
support of the political aims of the society. The potential power of the profession is so great that absolute obedience is essential if the society is to be protected from that which is supposed to protect it. As a
result its members swear absolute obedience to the
political will of society as expressed by its government. As a consequence they can be ordered to use
violent force in situations where they may personally
disagree with the political will of their society. In doing so, military professionals risk capture by the enemy, injury, and death. They may also experience
events that forever change how they see themselves
and the world in which they live.
PROFESSIONAL SIMILARITIES BETWEEN MEDICINE AND THE MILITARY
Thus far these two professions—medicine and
the military—have been separately discussed in their
idealized aspects. Medicine seeks to help individuals
remain healthy, or to restore them to health, or to
ease their suffering if they cannot be cured. Societies benefit from having healthy citizens. The military
seeks to protect its society by dissuading others
from attacking that society, but if this dissuasion
fails, then the military is allowed, indeed required,
to unleash its arsenal of violence to protect its society. These are two very different professions, yet societies, if they are to survive, need both of them, just
as they need laws and moral direction. The physician-soldier bridges these two professions.
The similarities between these two professions
are seen in a number of arenas, as summarized in
Table 10-1. For instance, to be successful, the physician must operate at a variety of levels in a close
relationship with his patient. This results in a milieu
that at its core can attract the neophyte physician
in the same way that the young military professional is attracted to his milieu—war.
It is not an accident that many words of clinical
medicine are the words of war. For instance, a war
is being waged against cancer, diseases attack the
body, and the physician aggressively uses everything
in his armamentarium to claim victory for his patient
over the disease. “We will defeat cancer in our lifetime,” was a long standing pledge of the American
Cancer Society. Tumors invade tissue. They are destroyed by radiation or chemotherapy. Antibiotics
kill bacteria. These are not the words of passive
exercises. They are the words of battle, a battle that
can result in the death or debilitation of the patient
if not successfully fought. This vocabulary is appropriate because for many patients and medical
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
280
professionals who help them, the perceived ultimate
responsibility of the practitioner is to defeat death.
The role of the medical professional results in
attractions similar to those of the profession of arms.
This similarity in attractions occurs because the
milieu of both professions involve the same significant life events: illness, injury, pain, suffering, and
death. In dealing with these realities the doctor
undergoes the same kind of acculturation that the
professional soldier experiences. The physician is
transformed by similar experiences; sights that
transform, relationships that bond, and the experiences of birth and death that can change reality for
both the patient and the physician. These experiences serve as the foundation of the attraction of
the profession for many.
There is one arena in which there are few, if any,
similarities between the professions. With rare exception, the ethics of the medical profession allow
the physician to escape his world of injury and illness, pain and death. The medical professional can
practice when, where, and how he wants, limited
only by the market forces that exist. He cannot be
ordered to treat a particular patient, nor can he be
ordered to practice medicine at all. The military
professional lacks this autonomy. Having examined
the two professions separately, and then having
noted their similarities, it is time to address the central theme of our discussion: Is there, then, a fundamental conflict between the two professions and
their attendant roles, that is, in being both physician and soldier?
THE PHYSICIAN-SOLDIER: PROVIDING MEDICAL CARE AND CONSERVING LIVES
The simplest way to answer our question regarding any fundamental conflict between the professions of medicine and the military is to say that the
question does not exist. As Huntington put it,
Individuals, such as doctors, who are not competent
to manage violence but who are members of the
officer corps are normally distinguished by special
titles and insignia and are excluded from positions
of military command. They belong to the officer
corps in its capacity as an administrative organization of the state, but not in its capacity as a professional body…26(p28)
In Huntington’s view physicians in the military are
not really members of the profession of arms. They
are not warriors. They only function administratively as soldiers. Military issues are peripheral to
what they do and what is really important in their
professional lives. The military ethos is seen as alien
and irrelevant.
There is support for this position by “the line,”
those in the combat arms who are trained to do the
fighting. Doctors are seen as necessary, but peripheral to the mission. As a class, they are known (with
some justification) for their less than ideal military
appearance and relaxed view of military relationships and attitudes. This relaxed view is accepted
because what the warrior wants to be sure of is that
the physician is competent as a physician. The soldier facing combat understands that his survival may
depend upon the medical skills, not the military skills,
of the physician. So the physician becomes “the Doc,”
accepted, supported, respected in his own way, but
clearly not part of the brotherhood of arms.
This approach also is accepted by the physicians.
Military physicians see themselves in rather individualistic terms, even within their own profession.
It was easy for military physicians to see themselves
as professionally responsible for their military patients and their families without being part of the
world that surrounded them. What the warriors do
or train to do is germane only insofar as the influence
that it has on the illnesses and injuries that result.
This view of physicians in the military is also
accepted by the international community. Military
physicians and those under their direct command
are accorded a special “noncombatant” status. Under the Geneva Conventions such noncombatants
may not engage in offensive actions, though they
may defend themselves and their patients if attacked. If captured they are, at least in theory, not
prisoners. Their status is that of “detained persons.”
Under international law, physician-soldiers are not
quite soldiers.
But just as the professional soldier who spends
most of his career preparing to go to war may find
his attitudes change in the reality of war, members
of the profession of medicine may be forced by circumstance to act as members of the profession of
arms. They must take on at least some of the ethos
of the profession of arms if they are to survive,
mentally and physically. When this occurs the physicians may be forced to face the question: “Is there
a conflict being both physician and soldier?” The
answer is no.
There is nothing in the ethos of the professions of
medicine and arms that prohibits an individual
from being a member of both professions. Both
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
281
serve society by providing society with an essential service. They have different ends, yet the ends
are certainly compatible, even mutually supportive. Without security neither individuals nor their
society can benefit from the profession of medicine.
Conversely, physical and mental health allow citizens to both enjoy the fruits of their society and to
be better equipped to handle threats to its fundamental values. The existence of both professions is
essential for the stability and development of society. The amount of resources to be spent on each
can be argued, but not their fundamental importance.
When comparing the two ethos it is clearly arguable that the military professional potentially risks
more for less personal benefit than does his medical professional colleague. Soldiers place themselves at significant personal risks in the acting out
of their professional role. They can be ordered to
act out their role even when they disagree with their
superiors. The success or failure of their professional actions and those under them may have a
direct impact upon the existence of their society.
Lastly, the attractions of war, the ultimate milieu of
their profession, may forever alter their view of
themselves and the world in ways that may make
it difficult for them to adjust back to normal life.
The world is a different place for the medical
professional. Even in this day of HIV infection,
medical professionals place themselves at little or
no risk in carrying out their professional roles. They
can, except in emergencies, refuse to act out their
professional role, for any reason, without the risk
of censure. The effect of the success or failure of
their professional actions rarely extends beyond
their patients and their families. Like their military
colleagues, the stress of their professional roles may
result in their developing perspectives that place them
at odds with that of the rest of society. However,
TABLE 10-1
COMPARISON OF MILITARY AND MEDICAL PROFESSIONS
Professional
Concern
Profession of Arms
Profession of Medicine
Who is the client of
the profession?
What is the nature
of the professional–
client relationship?
What are the ends
of the profession?
What are the means
of the profession?
What are the
obligations of the
professional?
The client of the profession of medicine is the individual patient and, through each patient, society
as a whole.
Historically the patient has been subservient to the
medical professional. However, this relationship is
evolving into one of shared responsibility and authority. Except in the case of emergency, both patients
and professionals have had the right to accept, reject, or terminate the professional relationship.
Neither party has the right to dictate to the other.
The profession of medicine is only one of many
social agencies, including individual patients, that
are responsible for assisting individuals and society in achieving their health goals.
The means of the profession of medicine are science-based technology and the cooperative relationship between the physician and patient.
Medical professionals can choose the location and
nature of their practice and to whom to offer their
skills. Only in the case of medical emergency are
medical professionals obligated to offer their services.
The client of the profession of arms is the
state.
The profession of arms is subservient to the
society. It is directed to fulfill this role by
the command authority of the government,
and must respond with absolute obedience
to any lawful commands.
The profession of arms is responsible for
assuring the security needs of the society.
In the United States its fundamental role
is the defense of the Constitution, the basic principles upon which American society is based.
The means of the profession of arms are
violence and the threat of violence on a
massive scale.
Military professionals may be ordered to
sacrifice their physical and mental health
or their lives in order to achieve the end of
the profession. They must obey orders
specifying how, where, and with whom
they will meet their obligation. They must
also give similar orders to their subordinates.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
282
rarely, if ever, does this result in the physician having difficulty living a normal, day-to-day existence.
If there is a conflict, it resides with the means of
the two professions. Those of the profession of arms
are designed to produce pain, suffering, and death,
or at least threaten those events. The means of the
profession of medicine are designed to relieve or
delay such events. Can a physician be part of an
organization that uses violence or the threat of violence to meet its professional responsibilities? The
answer is yes.
Societies, like the individuals that form them,
have the right to self-defense. Without this right
neither individuals nor their societies can survive.
The threatened or actual use of force is morally acceptable if the fundamental structure of the society
is threatened, either directly or indirectly. The use
of force, be it by individuals or societies, can be (and
often is) immoral. But the use of force is not, by its
nature, immoral.
The physician, as a citizen, has the same rights
and obligations to act in the defense of society as
does any other member of society. The physician,
by serving his society in time of war as a physician,
is simply meeting his responsibility to defend his
society with a special (and greatly needed) expertise. He is not violating his professional responsibility to relieve pain and suffering; rather it is being met in a special way. Being both a physician and
soldier does not detract from the role of the medical professional; it enhances it. Thus there is no fundamental ethical conflict in being both physician
and soldier. There is, in fact, a basic principle of
military action that joins the professions together
in war. The principle is that of conservation of force.
This principle is sometimes attacked by those who
do not understand it as it applies to military medicine. Therefore, it will be explored in some detail
to answer the concerns and criticisms of those who
would maintain that one cannot be both a physician and a member of the military profession.
Understanding the Principle of Conservation
The physician-soldier is challenged during military operations to “conserve the fighting strength”
of the combat arms units he supports. To meet the
obligations of his charge, he must involve himself
in the training, planning, and execution of his unit’s
specific mission. But what is this principle of conservation? What does it entail? And is it an applicable principle for the physician-soldier in both
peace and in war? To better understand the principle of conservation of force, it is necessary to look
at “operational” conservation and “ecological” conservation. Briefly, “operational” conservation revolves around the conservation of the resources of
a specific group or unit, directed toward a particular goal, whereas “ecological” conservation looks
at the entire, perhaps even global, environment.
“Operational” Conservation
Conservation of military (fighting) strength is
fundamental to the success of any given military
operation. The military commander uses the resources entrusted to him—men and materiel—to
accomplish the assigned mission. As Patton might
have put it (albeit more forthrightly), “Son, the idea
is not for you to die for your country, but for you to
help the other guy die for his.” In the process of
“helping” the enemy die for his country, the commander must allocate his manpower appropriately.
You use them up: they’re matériel. And part of being a good officer is knowing how much of them
you can use up and still get the job done. 27(p141)
But soldiers are more than just war materiel. They
are human beings. They are the sons and daughters, mothers and fathers, husbands and wives of
the society that has sent them to war.
Family members of soldiers in your command won’t
remember if you took “X” hill on “X” day in a battle.
They will remember if their son came home. 28
These most precious resources are to be spared
undue loss or waste. They are to be preserved and
maintained toward an end that typically exceeds
the immediate goals of victory in battle and returns
them to their homes. Surely, the military strategist
employs the principle of conservation when planning military operations.
The leaders of a nation’s armed forces must at some
point in their development of military strategy look
upon manpower as a finite resource. 29(p16)
Eikenberry explains that in the operational context, a military commander may choose to emphasize the conservation of his manpower for a number of different reasons29(p16):
• the uncertain nature of the direction of the
conflict,
• a calculated poor probability of success,
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
283
• to bide time while building strength,
• to avoid engagement and exhaust an enemy, and
• the commander’s sense of compassion and
the burden of responsibility he grapples
with in ordering men into battle, which give
him pause and a desire to avoid loss.
Similarly, a physician uses principles of “operational conservation” in his daily practice. Examples
of this include assessing the body’s physical reserve
in determining how aggressive one can be in treating
the disease (for example, not removing 90% of the lung
to eradicate a disease), holding certain antibiotics “in
reserve,” assessing likelihood of success, using riskto-benefit ratios to determine treatment modalities,
scheduling drug “holidays” to provide rest and recuperation, and using compassion for the amount of
suffering inflicted on the patient (“first do no harm”).
But beyond the operational context of conserving
strength, the principle of conservation is finding recognition in another and broader area of note that validates its utility for the physician-soldier, that area
being “ecological” conservation.
“Ecological” Conservation
A major ethical theme of global concern in recent decades has been what to do in order to balance the demands of an expanding world population within a finite and oftentimes fragile natural
environment. The extent to which environmental
development has occurred (in the name of sustaining human population growth needs) might well
be considered exploitative. But when the issue is
critically analyzed, both sides of the dilemma give
cogent arguments for thoughtful human action.
Development of the environment to accommodate
humans with very real and present needs must be
balanced with the goals of preserving the environment for the future and protecting it from further
exploitation. What is required to resolve the differences between parties on either side is an informed
moral approach. This approach develops from the
recognition of conservation as being applicable to
both the developers of the environment and those
who claim to be its conservators. Ideally such an
approach would emanate from the grassroots populace, that is, it would make sense to everyone. Pursuit of alternative management approaches that
mutually involve environmentalists and developers would follow. Both the individual citizen and
the collective society would be morally cognizant
and obliged to act upon this principle.
Kidder notes that “conservation…is part and parcel of our very humanity.”30(p205) Many of the actions
taken as human beings involved in family, community, and institutional life reflect the consensual
upholding of the value of conservation. Individuals are encouraged to engage in long-range planning, defer immediate gratification, and employ
rational foresight to effect a better life now for themselves or for generations to come. 30 Not surprisingly,
those things that become “part and parcel of our
very humanity” are very often expressed in metaphors in daily speech, as well as throughout written communications.
The Evolution of Conservation as Metaphor
In modern medicine, a number of metaphors
have been used to frame the discussion of healthcare
issues among professional staffs, the public, and
policy makers. Two widely recognized metaphors
in the United States have been the military metaphor, as previously discussed in this chapter, and
more recently the market metaphor (healthcare systems market products to consumers, physicians become
providers, and the goals of medicine are directed
toward a healthy bottom line). These metaphors, although in certain circles facilitating communication
and depicting a part of what modern medicine is
about, are necessarily narrowly focused and incomplete. The military metaphor calls forth a maledominated, hierarchal, and intrusive system that
may focus on short-term tactical goals rather than
the whole patient or patient’s sense of wellness
within a broader community. As Annas notes,
Military thinking concentrates on the physical, sees
control as central, and encourages the expenditure
of massive resources to achieve dominance. 31(p745)
The market metaphor, Annas goes on to explain,
is similarly flawed. It portrays the ill (and potentially vulnerable) patient as a consumer fully capable of making a rational decision from myriad
treatment options, motivated by choice, economy,
and contractual arrangements despite the prevailing corporate control of the marketplace.
The market metaphor conceals the inherent imperfections of the market and ignores the public nature of many aspects of medicine. 31(p745)
A third alternative, espoused by Annas, is the
“ecologic metaphor.” The language of ecology, inMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
284
cluding terms such as conservation, applied to
healthcare could well influence the way medicine
is discussed and practiced. This metaphor shifts the
emphasis away from the individual in isolation and
views him within the whole of his niche or habitat.
It requires the recognition of limits, a sense of community, and responsibility for something greater
than oneself—indeed beyond the immediate
lifespan of any individual. This metaphor emphasizes prevention and public health measures rather
than heroic yet wasteful interventions at the end of
life. In matters of resources and technology it
would, perhaps, lead to the favoring of “sustainable technology over technology we cannot afford
to provide to all who could benefit from it…”31(p746)
These ideas, then, frame the principle of conservation as it might be applied in peacetime and
battlefield medicine. The physician-soldier is both
aware of and involved in implementing some of
these ideas, perhaps unwittingly, in his daily practice of medicine. When called to an operational setting and asked to employ the principle of conservation toward the conservation of fighting strength
he recognizes his goals as minimizing casualty
losses, and preserving and maintaining human
life—the essence of “operational” conservation.
However, in a more global (or strategic) sense, he
may redirect his typical efforts aimed at individual
patient well-being toward more broadly aimed
goals of preserving the integrity of a military unit.
But this is not substantially different from viewing
the individual patient and his well-being within the
context of a community or larger society.
Similarly, the military professional must be able
to view the soldiers in his unit as parts of a greater
whole and recognize that strategic decisions may
require their interests to become secondary to societal needs. Once again, the two professions are not
all that dissimilar in their approach to serving the
greater good.
In fact, the soldier-patient in battle is synonymous with the civilian-patient in peacetime. Both
bring to the patient–physician relationship a need
for help that directs a specific area of the relationship. The patient brings three needs for help: (1)
one of the patient to himself, (2) another to the physician, and (3) yet another to society and the environment. The physician, whether in the military or
not, also enters three relationships: (1) one of responsibility to the sick person, (2) another to fighting
the disease, and (3) yet another to society. Every
physician, then, holds obligations to these three
parties and addresses each toward the ends of
health and well-being. To the patient he gains understanding and renders care to effect cure when
possible and relief or comfort always. To the disease he directs his learned attention to gain understanding of its pathogenesis and susceptibility to
treatment as well as its implications for subsequent
cases. And to society he is obliged to contain, control, and prevent the effects of disease. He is also
obliged to undertake research and to develop new
skills to effect this end, and to contribute to the education of others in his profession of service. 32(p74)
Physicians, whether military or civilian, have
always struggled with these roles and the conflicts
they introduce. Although pure Hippocratic medicine stresses the primacy of the duty of the physician to his individual patient, there have always
been societal needs that supersede those of the patient, for example, reporting or quarantining communicable diseases. Therefore, this concept is not
all that foreign to physicians.
Beyond the Metaphor of Conservation
In the previous discussion of operational conservation and ecological conservation, needs within the
context of a group or operation (and needs as they
affect the ecological balance all around us, now and
in the future) have been examined. But is there a further step to be taken, to understand how one can be
both physician and soldier? The answer is yes. “Collective” ethics shows how this can be attained.
Collective Ethics and Conservation
In matters beyond the individual patient–physician encounter, such as those involving medical
practices affecting a group of patients, the physician-soldier is perhaps more cognizant of a need
for some ethical grounding in what Pellegrino and
Thomasma have termed institutional or collective
ethics. 32 It may be at this level that individual physician-soldiers have perceptual concerns over the
prevailing ethic of the Army in armed conflict—its
request for conservation of fighting strength—towards what many physicians would view as an
unmerited end. The individual physician-soldier
who has not fully embraced the principle of conservation cannot understand how conserving the
lives of wounded men in battle and contributing to
the more effective use of manpower in pursuing an
armed conflict may ultimately allow for the conservation of larger numbers of men. This conservation, whether of his own nation’s military units or
those of the enemy, may bring to an expeditious end
the immediate battle or the greater war. Should furPhysician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
285
ther ends-based justification be necessary, the conservation of the society and its ideals for which it
has asked him to serve may also bear merit. The
physician-soldier, as a professional, may, nonetheless, be confounded by an apparent anomaly. This
anomaly is that his means of service, healing medicine, has a place amidst all of the killing employed
by the profession of arms as a means of obtaining a
greater end for the society they both serve. To be
sure, there is a need for a collective ethic—a prevailing principle—that allows for this apparent dissonance and validates the coexistence of the two
professions in the same context (war) and their
embodiment in the same individual.
There is, as yet, no fully developed ethical theory
to define the obligations of a group of individuals
(the team) making decisions which affect the wellbeing of another person, the patient. 32(p245)
Physician-soldiers may look to the Army Medical Department (AMEDD) or the Army itself for
evidence of such a collective ethic or for those values that comprise the ethos of the military surgeon.
In reality, however, there has been no formal ethical theory specific to military physicians. It is the
responsibility of the individual physician-soldier to
reflect on how his personal values relate to being a
physician in the military in war and peace. In particular, the physician-soldier needs to reflect on the
concept of conservation of force and his response
and responsibilities to it. The principle of conservation facilitates this “collective” ethic in the following manner:
• The wounded soldier is both an individual
and a member of a larger unit.
• He was wounded while enacting his role
with expectations of support and relationships of trust with his command, his comrades, and the healthcare system.
• When he seeks medical attention, he maintains these expectations of the healthcare
team as much or more so than he does of
the individual physician who cares for him.
• Hence, a collective ethic is in place in which
moral obligations to the soldier in need are
incurred by virtue of the fact that any specific individual (eg, physician, nurse,
physician’s assistant, or medic) is a member of the group (the same greater group,
in fact, the Army) as the patient.
The moral decision of an individual healthcare team
member, then, never occurs in isolation. It should
occur in concert with a greater, prevailing group
ethic.
Further delineation of this idea may be drawn
by comparing the military healthcare system with
a civilian community hospital. The community hospital, by its very existence within a community,
declares its availability of resources and mission to
serve those in need. Some may come to see their
private physician, but others need urgent or emergent care that they expect the institution to provide,
even when they do not have a personal physician.
The wounded soldier-patient does not have, or seek,
a personal physician. He has urgent needs. He expects the military healthcare system to meet those
needs in the same way that the community hospital does. In this way that system acts to assume
those obligations for care that a personal physician
would and that are consistent with the expressed
(declared) purposes of the larger institution (the
AMEDD motto “to conserve fighting strength”).
The moral obligations of the physician member
of this healthcare team are substantially different
than were he in community or private practice engaging in a personal encounter with his patient.
These differences are necessarily brought about by
the austere environment of war, a superseding or
collective group ethic, and the impersonal level of
relationship between any team member and the
patient. These differences, however, do not obviate
the need for the team as well as the physician to
live up to their moral obligations, just as the private physician and the community hospital both
fulfill their obligations to the patient and the society at large. A prevailing, and previously disclosed,
principle of conservation facilitates the meeting of
these obligations without undue tension for the
physician-soldier: The healthcare team is directed
to meet certain specified needs of the soldier-patient and his greater institution, the Army. It is composed of various professional and paraprofessional
persons held together by a common purpose—to
heal the wounded and care for the dying. It operates under the principle of conservation (which is
at the same time patient-centered, physician-directed, and institution-preserving), meeting the
needs of the immediate patient, the greater unit (the
Army), and the institution (society) that has placed
him in harms way. Collective action, the unifying
concept of all teams, infers an acting together of
many individual team members. These actions follow decisions made, in advance and at-the-moment,
by a dynamic process of team member interaction
determined to enact a foregone end—in the case of
battlefield medicine, healing, caring, and ultimately
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
286
the conservation of force.
Acting both individually and collectively, personal skills, expertise, and competence effect the
desired end. Each team member is responsible for
his actions. But the team itself “shares in this responsibility since it must assure that these actions
are well carried out by team members to whom they
are assigned and whether a particular person
should have been chosen—or rather, entrusted—
with the task of carrying it out.”32(p257) Hence, the
usual moral obligations on the part of the individual
physician are operative. But so, too, are the potentially complicating moral obligations of the team
as a team per se. This compels the individual team
members to not only attend to their own ethics of
conduct, professional integrity, and action but to
seek a well-grounded (principled) ethic of team action under which they can reasonably and effectively operate.
Modern medicine today is practiced across
healthcare disciplines and through complex and
intricate relationships among generalists, specialists, institutions, and patients. In its practice, an
effective “relationship” is wielded between the patient and his physician, a healthcare team, and an
institution (hospital), all of whom have obligations
“to provide competent, responsive, and personal
care and to fulfill that obligation by virtue of the
competence of those”32(p258) employed. So it is for
the physician-soldier in battlefield medicine who
acts out of personal, professional, institutional, and
moral obligation to render effective care for the
wounded.
In order that the principle of conservation be
employed with reason and result, it must ultimately
be patient-centered and physician-directed. Military
units are typically directed collectively to achieve
their mission, the objective of which is greater than
the well-being of any single individual. Healthcare
teams, by contrast, must ultimately act individually toward specific patients. But it is the recognized
and expected role of the military healthcare team
to act in this way in order to ultimately “conserve
the fighting strength.” For conservation to be employed toward the care of the wounded by anyone
other than a physician, specifically a logistical or
tactical commander, is to risk the inhumane and
uncaring utilitarian view, as recounted by one observer, of General George Patton in 1943:
If you have two wounded soldiers—one with a
gunshot wound of the lung, and the other with an
arm or leg blown off, you save the s.o.b. with the
lung wound and let the g.d.s.o.b. with the amputated arm or leg go to hell. He is no g.d. use to us
anymore!33(p12)
It is now time to return to the fundamental question of this chapter: How does being a physiciansoldier as a member of a moral profession employ
the principle of conservation to effect the militarypolitical imperative?
Conservation and the New Military-Political
Imperative
Conservation of force can be seen as an essential
component of the new military-political imperative—achieve the mission with the lowest possible
casualty rate. The individual soldier is viewed as
the most precious resource held by his command.
Current social pressures and media attention demand
that casualty burden be minimized in conflicts today. To employ the principle of conservation in a
patient-centered sense effects a minimum of casualties. When casualties are inevitably encountered,
patient-centered physician-directed conservation
sees to their treatment with optimal results.
Conservation of force allows for the successful
completion of the military task that would otherwise not be politically acceptable. It must see to the
emplacement of all necessary resources with concerted effort and intent to render expedient and efficient care to the wounded and dying. Hence, it
requires thorough preparation of essential personnel, the readiness of their equipment through preventive maintenance, and the minimization of
waste. While training for, planning, and executing
the mission of the AMEDD, the physician-soldier
acts to conserve the precious resources at his disposal.
Ethically, the overriding duty of the professional
is to foresee and forestall the risks to which his superior knowledge makes him privy. 34(p338)
These three phases of the healthcare team’s activity (training, planning, and execution), directed
by the physician-soldier and guided by the principle of conservation, in many ways parallel those
of any successful military operation. 35
Training. The physician-soldier will become involved in training medical personnel at all levels—
in effect expanding the reach of the healthcare team
to the level of the soldiers providing “buddy-aid”
or acting as combat life-savers. Physician Assistants’
and skilled corpsmen’s specialized talents are developed only with appropriate training and experience. To allow the greatest conservation of life and
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
287
materiel, these “physician-extenders” need the
guidance of physicians. Depending upon the size
of the medical unit, education and training may also
need to be provided to nurses and junior physicians.
Planning. As planning is essential to the military
commander to effect a successful military operation,
so, too, is it essential for the physician-soldier in
order to effect his mission—the conservation of
fighting strength. Successful planning must be continuous in order to adapt to the changing demands
of any system, in peacetime or battle. Certainly the
many unknowns and variables that affect the flow
of battle can test even the best medical treatment
and evacuation plans. But the plan of health service support for battle serves as the framework—
the common understanding—upon which all the
changes are made. Without a vision of what is to
come and how it will be managed, the physiciansoldier leading the health service support team cannot hope for success.
In planning for each contingency, the physiciansoldier employs the principle of conservation. His
preparation, combined with training in preplanned
responses, allows him to offer to his commander
the best possible health service support for the military operation, be it a limited engagement or an
extended conflict. He ensures the minimizing of
waste, perhaps the most readily apparent application of the principle of conservation. Medical supplies, personnel, or other resources (such as chemical decontamination elements and water) that are
used for one individual clearly are not available to
be used for another. Evacuation assets, ground or
air ambulances, holding area and treatment beds,
and even in-theater hospital beds are all limited in
availability and must be effectively managed.
Evacuation routes may be long and return times
significant, thereby requiring judicious utilization
by the sending medical unit. Other complexities that
demand a mind toward conservation include limited communication, resupply, and maintenance
capabilities at various echelons of health service
support. The threat of the health service support
unit coming under fire will similarly require the
attention of the physician-soldier who is looking out
for the patients under his charge as well as the integrity of the medical unit.
The greatest and most precious resource of the
US fighting force is the individual soldier. Physician-soldiers and the command must take measures
that allow the conservation of soldiers’ physical and
mental health, their lives, and their fighting effectiveness. The most apparent acts of conservation,
then, would include those things that would avoid
any wasteful or neglectful expenditure of human
lives, that is, avoidance of excessive casualty rates.
The soldier whose life is preserved in battle joins
others who are, in effect, conserved toward an end
beyond the present conflict—that of returning home
to the society that has requested their service. The
obligation of the physician-soldier is simultaneously to the individual life of the wounded soldier, the unit in which he serves, and the society
for whom he and the soldier-patient both serve.
These obligations may, or may not, be apparent
to all parties involved—the physician-soldier, the
soldier-patient, the command, and the society. They
are certainly difficult to meet without the proper
education, training, and planning. Each party
should know the role of the other and the end to
which they exist together. And the recognition of a
guiding principle—the principle of conservation—
is necessary. This principle obligates the physiciansoldier toward his patients, his unit, and the greater
society embodied in the fighting force he is supporting. His capabilities as a clinician, health service support planner, and advisor to unit commanders (knowledgeable in field expedient means of
mass casualty triage and care, logistics, and utilization of medical intelligence) all must be addressed
prior to deployment, to allow him to efficiently and
effectively “conserve fighting strength.”
The second activity in which the physician-soldier employs the principle of conservation and involves himself during both training and planning
phases is the preservation of human resources available to the command. Preservation presumes an
extant integrity, and perhaps this, too, should be
recognized as a responsibility of the physician-soldier: to see to the physical, mental, and emotional
readiness of soldiers. The predeployment health of
soldiers, their participation in regular physical
training, and mental preparedness all may be
viewed as activities that can be influenced by physician-soldiers with troops in garrison toward the
end of preserving an effective (well-fit, well-trained,
and well-equipped) fighting force. The idea that
preparedness contributes to readiness for combat
in such a way as to preserve and conserve fighting
strength has been summarized in this oft-quoted
training adage: “The more you sweat in training the
less you bleed in battle.”
Finally, the third activity, that of the maintenance
of resources, both men and materiel, available for
the provision of health service support to the command, is a responsibility best met by the physiciansoldier. He must allocate scarce resources, see to the
continuing education and readiness of combat medMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
288
ics, and ensure the operational integrity of field
medical equipment. Although perhaps at odds with
the typical Western Hippocratic advocacy for the
individual patient when seeking resources for patient
care,36 the broader considerations of the physiciansoldier in resource allocation reflect an additional
commitment to a greater body than the individual
patient (soldier). That greater body is the military
unit (be it company, battalion, brigade, division, or
corps), that is, the “fighting strength.” Indeed failure to recognize and respond to this commitment
may well jeopardize any and every other activity
that the physician-soldier in combat would choose
to pursue on behalf of any individual patient. The
shift in emphasis from the individual soldier-patient
to the collective unit (or army) is in keeping with
the deemphasis (some would argue deletion) of individual autonomy that is part of being a soldier belonging to a uniformed military force. Thus, the
uniqueness of the individual is lost to the uniformity
of the whole force. Individual autonomy is sacrificed
to a larger military unit for the purpose of conducting a military operation that requires unit cohesion
and singleness of purpose rather than competing
ideas, plans, and means of execution.
In these three ways—(1) the minimizing of waste,
(2) the preservation of life, and (3) the maintenance
of all resources available to him, both materiel and
human in nature—the physician-soldier employs
the principle of conservation. He prepares himself
and those who work with him in the health service
support units to effectively execute their mission
of conserving the fighting strength.
Execution. Perhaps the most difficult role for the
physician-soldier to adapt to is the execution of his
mission in the crucible of battle. It is here that the
profession of arms and the profession of medicine
truly are joined. It is here, at first blush, that the
irony of the former profession’s means demands
and validates the means of the latter to effect the
same mutually desired end for a society that both
serve and represent.
The execution of a patient-centered and physiciandirected principle of conservation requires an adjustment on the part of many physicians. Although
not strictly at odds with the goals of medicine and
the provision of care to patients in a global context,
the provision of care in a combat environment
makes demands upon the physician-soldier that are
strange to him should he be accustomed to practicing medicine in the modern high-tech arena of the
United States. In combat, the physician must accept
that chaos is both normal and inevitable. He must
grapple with the realities of limited resources,
skewed triage categories, and the rarity of masscasualty scenarios relative to the need for austerity
in providing a medical response. 37 Indeed, accounts
of casualty management in previously reported
conflicts suggest that it is the appropriate stabilization at first echelon facilities by medics, aidmen,
and corpsmen; scrupulous use of evacuation assets;
and a rethinking of specific health service support
unit capabilities that will contribute most to effective conservation of the fighting strength. The
widely proffered line that the mission of the health
services support team in military operations is
solely to return as many soldiers to the front as possible has become outdated. It must be reexamined
in light of current medical and surgical capabilities,
societal expectations, and even the realities of morbidity data from recent conflicts. Koehler notes that
greater than 80% of patients requiring second echelon (eg, surgical) care are not returned to duty, but
are stabilized, treated, and then evacuated. 38
The final reality that the physician-soldier must
deal with, which is often found to be most difficult, is
the frequency of austere conditions in which he must
try to enact as much good as possible. Indeed both
the immediate intervention and expected outcome (eg,
morbidity and mortality) must often be compromised
relative to either the standard of peacetime practice
to which he is accustomed or the changing environment in which he finds himself. The effective level of
care that he is able to provide may change depending
upon numerous variables: duration of the conflict,
supplies, casualty load, exhaustion, or even his own
unit’s security. 37,39 For example, a well-staffed and
supplied, relatively sophisticated surgical hospital
may function almost on par with a civilian community hospital (no austere constraints) early in a conflict. Casualty burden may be low, supplies maintained, and staff well-rested. But given a prolonged
conflict, increased casualty burden, protracted or congested evacuation chain, and diminishing supplies,
the level of care may of necessity be diminished. This
would reflect a change in austerity constraints and
require a phenomenal adjustment on the part of physicians operating under such circumstances. The capacity to do good and the expected outcome of most
interventions in such a scenario would obviously
change. This can be a considerable drain on an individual physician-soldier or his health service support
unit as a whole. The prevailing principle of conservation, while providing direction toward a desired end,
cannot obviate the moral angst of such a predicament.
But should the physician-soldier never have contemplated these possibilities and fully explored the
application of patient-centered, physician-directed
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
289
conservation; should he never have trained, planned,
and implemented the health service support mission
guided by this principle, as broadly addressed here,
he might well be less equipped to deal with the realities of war and its impact on his capabilities in context. This, then, would be of even greater detriment,
because the effective and efficient use of the physician-soldier toward every level of obligation (patient,
unit or team, army or command, and even society)
would diminish and conservation in every facet fail.
Executing the mission of health service support
under the principle of conservation, then, facilitates
the physician-soldier:
• dealing with the austere constraints of
battlefield medicine and surgery that affect
both his capacity for intervention and his
expected outcomes;
• balancing individual patient outcomes with
unit, and army, mission, and societal expectations;
• managing a changing resource supply and
distribution situation amidst conflict;
• triaging effectively to optimize outcomes; and
• giving some attention to the potential of
“caring too much” and expecting too much
of himself given the context in which he
operates (a moral balm).
The physician-soldier employing the principle of
conservation in the mission of health service support is consistent with its use in the combat arms.
It is likewise consistent with modern metaphors
used in ethical analysis, as well as to frame the discussion of certain areas of healthcare. Given the
collective, or team, nature of health service support
in providing care for combat arms units that represent the larger institution (the Army), it requires
attention not only from the individual professional
(eg, physician-soldier) who must act out of integrity, moral discernment, and courage, but also the
collective team (health service support unit) and
larger institution, upon whom it is morally incumbent to disclose its operative philosophy to every constituent (the soldier who may also be a future patient).
The paradigm of conservation, in which the end
determinant has been troop (fighting) strength, may
now need reconsideration as minimal casualty burden and lesser health service support, become both
an operational concern for smaller units engaged
in widely dispersed areas of operation and a societal (political) concern for those placing military
units in harm’s way. Conservation may require a
greater assessment of overall resource allocation
(both medical personnel and materiel) and even
become more individually (patient) focused for the
physician-soldier. 40
CONCLUSION
There is no ethical conflict in being both physician and soldier. The ethos of the two professions
are not contradictory. In addition to the common
focus on the conservation of force, the two professions, as professions, place a moral demand upon
the physician-soldier.
Professions are separated from society by their
specialized knowledge and the historical perspective of their professional role in society. The profession of arms, perhaps better than any other group,
understands the consequences to individuals and
to society of the use of violence to achieve national
political goals. The profession of medicine likely
understands the role of health and the consequences
of the means to achieve it better than any other
group. Professions have the historical reference to
see their role in the context of history, not just in
the immediate case. This knowledge and historical
perspective gives to the profession the ability and
the responsibility to give back to the society its
unique view of the moral consequences of the goals
of the profession as set by society. Both as members
of their society and as professionals, physicians and
soldiers have the responsibility to engage in the
debates about what society seeks of those who serve
it. They must do so within the constraints of their
professional relationship with society. The profession of arms is not the only profession that must
act to fulfill Huntington’s view of the professional
roles as counselor, spokesperson, and executor. As
Parrish notes,
[t]he question is, “What good is this war?”…Are the
consequences of not fighting a war worse than fighting one…The trouble is that the people who decide
to fight wars know the least about what they are really all about. Somebody has to tell them…Somebody
has to tell them what this war is all about. 1(p9)
The question of being both physician and soldier
ultimately is not a question about the ethos of the
two professions. Rather the question is about the
ethos of the society and what the societies can order
members of the professions to do, be they warriors
or physicians. The responsibility for answering that
question falls to both the society and the professionals who serve it.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
290
REFERENCES
1.
 Parrish JA. 12, 20, & 5: A Doctor’s Year in Vietnam. New York: Doubleday Publishing; 1972.
2.
Simpson JA, Weiner ESC. The Oxford English Dictionary. Vol 12. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1989.
3.
Percival T. Medical Ethics; or a Code of Institutes and Precepts, Adapted to the Professional Conduct of Physicians and
Surgeons. Manchester, England: S Russell; 1803.
4.
Department of Defense. Uniform Code of Military Justice. Washington, DC: DoD; 2000.
5.
Pope John XXIII. Pacem in Terris [papal encyclical]. Rome: The Vatican; 11 April 1963. Available at: http://
www.vatican.va/holy_father/john_xxiii/encyclicals/documents/hf_j-xxiii_enc_11041963_pacem_en.html.
Accessed 9 October 2001.
6.
Sigerist HE. A History of Medicine. Vol 1. New York: Oxford University Press; 1951.
7.
Veatch RM. Medical Ethics. 2nd ed. Boston: Jones & Bartlett Publishers; 1997: 6–8.
8.
Edelstein L. The Hippocratic Oath: Text, Translation and Interpretation. In: Bulletin of the History of Medicine, Supplement No. 1. Sigerist HE, ed. Baltimore, Md: The Johns Hopkins Press; 1943.
9.
World Medical Association. Declaration of Geneva (1948) Physician’s Oath. Adopted by the General Assembly
of the World Medical Association, Geneva, Switzerland, September 1948 and amended by the 22nd World
Medical Assembly, Sydney, Australia, August 1968. Available at: http://www.cirp.org/library/ethics/geneva/.
Accessed 22 October 2001.
10.
World Medical Association. International Code of Medical Ethics. Adopted by the 3rd General Assembly of the
World Medical Association, London, England, October 1949 and amended by the 22nd World Medical Assembly, Sydney, Australia, August 1968, and then the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983.
Available at: http://www.wma.net/e/policy/17-a_e.html. Accessed 22 October 2001.
11.
American Medical Association. Principles of Medical Ethics. 1957. Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/
ama/upload/mm/369/1957_principles.pdf. Accessed 22 October 2001.
12.
American Medical Association. Principles of Medical Ethics, June 2001. Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/
ama/pub/category/2512.html. Accessed 9 October 2001.
13.
Statement by Dr. Benjamin Rush. In: On the Duties of Patient to Their Physicians. As quoted in: Faden RR,
Beauchamp TL. A History and Theory of Informed Consent. New York: Oxford Press; 1986.
14.
Thomas L. The Newest Science. New York: Bantam Books; 1984.
15.
Hippocrates. Precepts. In: Great Books of the Western World. Vol. 10. New York: Encyclopedia Britannica; 1952.
16.
Peabody FW. The care of the patient [a monograph]. JAMA. 1927;88(March 19):1–88.
17.
Radetsky M. Quoted by: Dan BB, Young RK, eds. A Piece of My Mind. New York: Ballantine Books; 1988.
18.
Dyer G. War. New York: Crown; 1985.
19.
Jones A. The Art of War in the Western World. New York: Oxford; 1987: 253–255.
20.
Huntington SP. The military mind: Conservative realism of the professional military ethic. In: War, Morality and
the Military Profession. Boulder, Colo: Westview Press; 1986.
21.
Code of Conduct for Members of the Armed Forces of the United States. 53 Fed Register 10355 (1988).
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Profession
291
22.
Norman M. Peace and war. Washington, DC: Washington Post Magazine. 17 February 1991:w21–w23.
23.
Gray JG. The Warriors, Reflections on Men in Battle. 2nd ed. New York: Perennial Library; 1970.
24.
McDonald JR. Platoon Leader. New York: Bantam Books; 1986.
25.
From a letter left on the Vietnam Memorial. Cited in: Palmer L. Shrapnel in the Heart: Letters and Remembrances
From the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. New York: Random House; 1987.
26.
Huntington SP. Officership as a profession. In: War, Morality and the Military Profession. Boulder, Colo: Westview
Press; 1986.
27.
Paul Fussel, infantry officer, World War II. Cited in: Dwyer G. War. New York: Crown; 1985.
28.
Richard Pearl, Lieutenant Colonel, United States Army, Cobra gunship pilot, Vietnam. Personal Communication, 3 January 1986.
29.
Eikenberry KW. Casualty limitation and military doctrine. Army. February 1995: 16, 18.
30.
Kidder RM. How Good People Make Tough Choices. New York; William Morrow & Co, Inc; 1995: 202–207.
31.
Annas GJ. Reframing the debate on health care reform by replacing our metaphors. N Engl J Med.
1995;332(11):744–747.
32.
Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. A Philosophical Basis of Medical Practice. New York: Oxford University Press;
1981.
33.
Churchill ED. Surgeon to Soldiers. Diary and Records of the Surgical Consultant Allied Force Headquarters, World
War II. Quoted by: Smith AM. The ethos of the military physician. Pharos. 1993;56(4):11–14.
34.
Vastyan EA. Warriors in white: Some questions about the nature and mission of military medicine. Tex Rep Biol
Med. 1974;32(1):327–342.
35.
Carter BS. The military physician and conservation of force. Mil Med. 1993;158(6):374–375.
36.
Levinsky NG. The doctor’s master. N Engl J Med. 1984;311(24):1573–1575.
37.
Dressler DP, Hozid JL. Austere military medical care: A graded response. Mil Med. 1994;159(3):196–201.
38.
Koehler RH, Smith RS, Bacaner T. Triage of American combat casualties: The need for change. Mil Med.
1994;159(8):541–547.
39.
Smith AM. The ethos of the military physician. Pharos. 1993;56(4):11–14.
40.
Jeffer EK. Medical triage in the post-Cold War era. Mil Med. 1994;159(5):389–391.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
292
