157
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
Chapter 6
HONOR, COMBAT ETHICS, AND
MILITARY CULTURE
FARIS R. KIRKLAND, PHD*
INTRODUCTION
HONOR
Integrity
Taking Care of Subordinates
Perversions of Honor
COMBAT ETHICS
Restraining Military Personnel From Committing Atrocities
Enabling Military Personnel to Carry Out Morally Aversive Acts
Strengthening Resistance to Combat Stress Breakdown
MILITARY CULTURE: A RESPONSIBILITY OF COMMAND
Authority, Discipline, and Maladaptive Cultural Practices
Building Support for Discipline and the Command Structure
Elements of an Ethically Supportive Military Culture
CONCLUSION
*Lieutenant Colonel (Retired), Field Artillery, United States Army; Battalion Executive Officer, 4th Battalion, 42nd Field Artillery (Vietnam, 1967–
1968); Senior Research Associate, University City Science Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Guest Scientist, Division of Neuropsychiatry, Walter
Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, DC (Dr. Kirkland died 22 February 2000)
158
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
SP4 Michael Crook
Perimeter Patrol
Vietnam
This artwork depicts three soldiers working together as a team: one helping another, while the third waits, gun at the
ready in case the enemy is encountered. This teamwork, whether in a squad, platoon, company, or higher level, is the
foundation of an effective military. Available at: http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/art/A&I/Vietnam/p_3_4_67.jpg.
Art: Courtesy of Army Art Collection, US Army Center of Military History, Washington, DC.
159
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
INTRODUCTION
Military personnel, who function in the midst of
moral and material chaos, are dependent on an ethically coherent context to enable them to persevere
in their missions and to protect their sanity and
character. 1(pp5ff,165ff,198) Further, the foundation of combat effectiveness is cohesion—which develops in a
climate of integrity, trust, and respect across ranks.
Trust and respect derive in part from adherence to
mutually agreed upon definitions of acceptable behavior. While a superficial analysis might suggest
that ethical considerations are meaningless for organizations dedicated to missions of destruction,
the opposite is true. A system of credible ethics in
the culture of an armed force is an essential foundation for its fighting power.
First a word about culture. Human beings, having fewer preprogrammed behavioral patterns than
other mammals, need older people to teach them
how to cope with their environment. Culture is a
set of behaviors, values, and ways of assessing circumstances passed from an older generation to a
younger. It provides the young human with a substitute for instincts—a set of responses to enable him
to deal with many situations. Parents and elders
often portray the beliefs they teach as absolute virtues, but culture is really nothing more than the
behaviors and values that worked for members of
preceding generations.
Ethical systems are the components of culture
that people create to guide behavior and facilitate
human interactions by defining values and actions
as virtuous or evil. People create ethics to meet practical and psychological needs. Awareness of these
needs enables them to approach ethics from an active, adaptive, and operational perspective rather
than from a passive, normative perspective. The
needs of people in a military culture differ from
those of their civilian compatriots because in the
performance of their military duties they often must
behave in ways that would normally be judged
immoral by the larger culture.
An important role of ethics is helping military
men and women preserve their characters in the
midst of the ambiguities of war. Fromm defines
character as the “forms in which human energy is
canalized [channeled] in the process of assimilation
and socialization.”2 Shay and Munroe define it as
“a person’s attachments, ideals and ambitions, and
the strength and quality of the motivational energy
that infuses them.”3(pp393–394) Taking these dynamic
views of character as a point of departure, when I
mention character in this discussion I will be referring to the abilities to form stable relationships, to
believe in the efficacy of one’s actions, and to depend on one’s values as guides to behavior. For an
ethical system to be useful in a military context, it
has to enable soldiers to persevere in their military
duties while preserving their characters.
This chapter is about how people experience
military life and how they treat each other; it is not
about abstract ideals, virtues, or codes of conduct.
It is about the soldier whose duty is to look through
the sights of his rifle and shoot another human being. Whether he forbears to fire, fires with the intent to miss, or shoots to kill, he must live with the
emotional consequences for the rest of his life. It is
about the new lieutenant detailed to inventory the
receipts from the officers’ club slot machines. The
club officer shows him four piles of coins, saying,
“This one is for the club, this one for me, this one for
you, and this one for the post commander.” What the
lieutenant does—acquiesces or reports the club officer
to the provost marshal—has consequences for his
character and for the service.
This chapter is about the colonel commanding
a brigade who is ordered to launch an attack that
he is certain will lead to the death or wounding
of more than half of his soldiers and will fail to
accomplish the mission. Does the colonel disobey
the order and lose his command—and with it the
ability to take care of his troops—or does he obey
and become complicit in the slaughter of his personnel? His character is challenged, as is the character of his superiors, and the ethical climate of the
armed force.
This chapter is also about the company commander told by his superior to exchange, on paper,
personnel and pieces of equipment with other units
so he will be able to state on his quarterly status
report that his unit qualifies for a peak readiness
rating. Such a maneuver seems innocuous, but there
are consequences. It deprives senior commanders
of information necessary to act to improve the actual
readiness of the unit. It potentially puts soldiers in
jeopardy because the unit will be committed to action in accordance with the readiness rating stated
on the report. Finally, it approves lying as a form of
career-enhancing behavior. 4,5
The contingencies of reinforcement that evolve
in a military culture determine its members’ behavior. When commanders shape, support, and model
behavior and values that are realistic and relevant
160
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
in the context of the situation their subordinates
face, they create an ethical system that works. It
works because it supports the fighting efficiency of
the organization and the psychological welfare of
its members.
This exploration of the complex ways in which
ethical and psychological factors interact to affect
fighting power is based largely on research conducted by the Department of Military Psychiatry
of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research
(WRAIR). During the period from 1979 to 1993, the
various individuals assigned the position of Deputy
Chief of Staff for Personnel, US Army, tasked
WRAIR to investigate the effects of the human dimensions of the US Army on the development of
high performance units and on resistance to combat stress breakdown. This author, a trained psychological researcher and military historian, joined
the WRAIR team to evaluate many of the issues
addressed in this chapter. His interpretations are
informed by his experiences as a line officer from
1953 to 1973, and by the observations of his military colleagues. The author’s service included duty
as an artillery forward observer in the closing stages
of the Korean War, company and battery commander during the interwar years, and battalion
executive officer and divisional staff officer during
the Vietnam War. His research is complemented by
an extensive literature of memoirs, oral histories,
and archival records.
There are three sections in this chapter. The first
is an analysis of honor, the central ethical construct
that has defined military personnel for centuries.
The second is an examination of the functions of
combat ethics—keeping behavior within bounds
compatible with the values of the larger culture,
sustaining those who must kill other human beings,
and protecting the characters of combatants. The
third section is a discussion of military culture as a
function of command and the cultural components
that could comprise an effective ethical system for
an armed force in the 21st century.
HONOR
Honor is a complex concept that has evolved over
at least 5,000 years and is continuing to evolve at
the present time. Several components of honor have
endured through time and are essential to the effectiveness of a military force in the 21st century.
Two components will be discussed—integrity and
taking care of subordinates. The third subsection
will discuss the danger of assertions of honor being perverted to serve dishonorable ends.
Integrity
Integrity is the fundamental component of honor.
In an institutional setting such as the military, the
term refers to the characteristic of consistently
choosing and acting in accordance with one’s beliefs and values. To be—and to be perceived as—a
person of integrity, those guiding beliefs and values must in turn be consistent with the commitments inherent in the institutional role that the individual has accepted. The significance of integrity
for the military will be explored in the following
discussion; one conclusion will be unavoidable:
Integrity is based on a commitment to honesty that
pervades individual and institutional behavior and
thought. Honesty is under assault in many spheres
of American culture—business, government, communications, the academic world, and the armed
forces. As a result, integrity today often seems to
be in short supply. This is a matter of particular
concern in the US Army where consequences of dishonesty can be catastrophic for national interests,
and fatal for junior personnel. Spin-doctoring, damage control, disinformation, and cover-ups are some
of the many ways of avoiding confrontation with
the truth that have been used to support the power
structure in the armed forces. The terms are new
but the practice is old. The long delay in acknowledging that American service members were exposed to toxic chemicals during the Persian Gulf
War is a recent example. 6 During the Vietnam War,
obligatory body counts, the Hamlet Evaluation System (Exhibit 6-1), and clandestine bombing operations were aspects of a military culture of deceit.
General Douglas MacArthur’s denial of the presence of Chinese soldiers in Korea in November 1950
was deceit at the highest level. The failure of subordinate US Army commanders, who knew the
Chinese were there, to stand up to him constituted
a chain of dishonesty down to the level of battalion
command—all of which was acceptable to the military culture of the time. 7
When a military institution embraces integrity
as its basic way of doing business, it becomes stronger. Leaders and subordinates can plan and act
knowing that their view of the situation is accurate.
They can count on each other to behave in predictable ways. And, perhaps most important in the 21st
century, they can trust each other to make their force
an active learning institution—one that is constantly
161
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
EXHIBIT 6-1
THE HAMLET EVALUATION SYSTEM
In 1967 the staff of the US Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV) developed the Hamlet Evaluation
System to measure pacification of the Vietnamese population. The objective was to demonstrate that the Americans and the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) were winning the minds and hearts of the Vietnamese population,
thus eroding the support base of the Vietcong. The results of monthly surveys of pacification were printed by
a computer as a single digit (1–5, denoting the degree of control by its enemy, the Vietcong) for each hamlet in
its geographical location on maps of Vietnam. The maps were used by policy makers in South Vietnam, the
Pentagon, and the White House. The idea had merit, but there were three problems. First, the US district
advisors responsible for making the surveys of the hamlets did not have the capability (staffing, vehicles,
security, and knowledge) for making accurate assessments. Second, the district advisors were almost powerless to influence the bases for loyalty to the United States or the Republic of Vietnam. And third, senior officials put pressure on their subordinates to make the surveys show positive progress. The Hamlet Evaluation
System quickly became degraded from an information system to a device by which officers could impress
their superiors. The figures were adjusted by every echelon of the advisor hierarchy. Though the system became completely fraudulent, senior military staff and policy makers believed that current systems were effective. Thus it continued to guide decision makers away from providing villagers security from the Vietcong—
a losing policy—and toward search and destroy operations—another losing policy.
Sources: (1) Sheehan N. A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam. New York: Random House; 1988: 697–
698, 732. (2) Kinnard D. The War Managers: American Generals Reflect on Vietnam. New York: Da Capo Press; 1991: 107–108. (3)
Sorley L. Honorable Warrior: General Harold K. Johnson and the Ethics of Command. Lawrence, Kan: The University Press of
Kansas; 1998: 196, 227–241.
examining itself and the threats it faces with a view
to improving its capabilities.
Integrity and Military Operations
Integrity is an indispensable part of military culture not because it is virtuous, but because it works.
It provides a factual foundation for operational coordination. When reconnaissance elements send
reports that are true, commanders can make plans
with accurate knowledge of enemy dispositions.
When progress, casualty, and materiel status reports
are correct, commanders can take action to strengthen
subordinate units and can assign them missions that
are within their capabilities. When adjacent units
keep each other informed honestly about the opposition they face, each can use its strength appropriately to cover its neighbors’ vulnerabilities. Military organizations in which these conditions obtain
are more likely to win than those in which decisions
are based on information that subordinates believe
their superiors would like to hear.
Integrity includes putting duty before personal
interests. Duty means the mission, the needs of
one’s subordinates, and the efficiency of the unit.
Sometimes putting duty first can be contrary to
one’s self-interest. An officer commanding a battery
of self-propelled howitzers who had felt the lash of
his colonel’s tongue about keeping all of his equipment operational would be reluctant to report that
six of his eight weapons had nonoperational power
rammers. If he tells the truth, he risks getting
chewed out or even relieved, but he provides his
colonel and higher echelons of command with information that could lead to a modification to improve the durability of the rammers or procedures
to keep the weapons operational without the
rammers.
The soldier who reports a criminal act risks retaliation by the perpetrator and his friends, but he
helps to maintain the standards of the organization
and protects his comrades. Each member of a military service faces conflicts between duty and his
own interests every day. By choosing the harder
right he strengthens both his own honor and the
ethical climate of his unit. But that does not make
such choices any easier. 8
A classic example of the effects on military operations when honesty is not part of the culture of
an armed force is the defeat of the North Vietnamese
Army and its South Vietnamese auxiliaries (the
Vietcong) during the Tet offensive of January and February, 1968. The North Vietnamese punished subordinates who reported bad news. Reports of failure or
of deficiencies in resources were perceived as both
incompetence and disloyalty. As a result, the high
162
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
command received optimistic reports, and used
these reports to confirm their hopes that their opponent was weakening and that the South Vietnamese
people were ready to rise against their government.
The Tet offensive was an all-out effort to defeat
the US forces, topple the Saigon regime, and win
the war. It included total commitment of North Vietnamese and Vietcong units on multiple fronts, a
shift from using terror only against locally hated
officials to assassination of any persons who might
be a focus of resistance no matter how popular they
were, and seizure of local political control by a clandestine Vietcong government.
The circumstances in South Vietnam in 1968 were
far from what their reports had led the North Vietnamese government to believe. Their military units
were defeated everywhere, the assassinations they
carried out alienated many South Vietnamese
who had supported them, and the Vietcong infrastructure was rendered politically impotent. UnforEXHIBIT 6-2
PATTERNS OF DECEIT IN US POLICY MAKERS
In 1971, when popular opposition to the American war in Vietnam was approaching its apogee, a government
official with access to the most secret documents on US policy in Vietnam released those documents to the
New York Times. The Pentagon Papers, as the documents came to be known, make it clear that the US intervention in South Vietnam, which had begun in 1954 when the French were expelled from Vietnam, was motivated
by fear that the states of the Pacific rim would be taken over by communist regimes. 1 In 1954, the United States
had been fought to a standstill in Korea by Chinese and North Korean communists. Communist insurgencies
were flourishing in Malaysia and the Philippines. China and Indonesia were ruled by communist regimes.
Singapore was on the point of electing a communist government. A communist regime in North Vietnam had
defeated and expelled the French from Vietnam. The United States was committed to supporting elections to
determine the government of South Vietnam. Faced with certain defeat, the United States reneged and began
programs of progressive military and economic support for the South Vietnamese. President Lyndon Johnson
did not trust the public to understand this purpose of the US intervention, so he espoused justifications, such
as a need for Vietnamese oil and South Vietnamese requests for US protection against North Vietnamese aggression, that were subsequently demonstrated to be untrue. 2,3 For instance, the notion that the United States
intervened at the request of the South Vietnamese government was false because that government was an
American creation, and the Americans assassinated leaders—including Ngo Dinh Diem, the Chief of State, in
1963, as well as his brother—who did not do as they were told. 4 Likewise, the Tonkin Gulf incident, a North
Vietnamese attack on US military ships used to get the Congress to give Johnson power to expand the military
commitment via the Tonkin Gulf Resolution of August 1964, was almost immediately exposed as a fraud. The
North Vietnamese attack was in direct response to attacks by South Vietnamese forces on North Vietnamese
coastal installations, guided by US destroyers operating just outside the 3-mile limit. Robert McNamara, the
US Secretary of Defense, denied any US involvement. 5
Routinely inflated reports of substantial progress coupled with unending requests for more troops (troop
strength increased from 185,000 at the end of 1965 to a wartime high of over 500,0004(p536) in 1968) sapped the
credibility of the senior commanders. With no vital US interest at stake, there was no criterion for progress in
the war. There was no sense of land captured and held, or of military objectives met. The number of dead
enemy soldiers became the only available indicator, and it became so important that senior commanders urged
subordinates to inflate their body counts. 4(p696) When critics totaled the body counts and announced that it
would appear that there were almost no enemy soldiers left alive, yet they kept on attacking, another fraud
was revealed. 6 By the time Tet 1968 came along, a substantial portion of Americans were disinclined to believe
official statements, even though in the case of Tet 1968 the official statements were relatively truthful. As US
officials praised the progress South Vietnamese forces were making during the withdrawal of US forces between 1970 and 1973, popular disbelief continued, and was ultimately validated by the total and rapid victory
of North Vietnamese forces in 1975.
Sources: (1) Sheehan N, Smith H, Kenworthy EW, Butterfield F. The Pentagon Papers: The Secret History of the Vietnam War.
New York: Bantam; 1971. (2) Hendrickson P. The Living and the Dead: Robert McNamara and the Five Lives of a Lost War. New
York: Alfred A Knopf; 1996. (3) McMaster HR. Dereliction of Duty: Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
and the Lies that Led to Vietnam. New York: HarperCollins; 1997. (4) Sheehan N. A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann and
America in Vietnam. New York: Random House; 1988: 353–371. (5) Andradé D, Conroy K. The secret side of the Tonkin Gulf
Incident. Naval History. Jul–Aug 1999;13(4):27–32. (6) Kinnard D. The War Managers. New York: Da Capo Press; 1991: 69,72–75.
163
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
tunately for the Americans, the deceit that had become endemic in their own government and armed
forces in the years leading up to Tet 1968 made the
public skeptical of reports of the American victory
(Exhibit 6-2).
Within an armed force, square dealing and honesty foster the growth of the trust that makes cohesion possible. But honesty is not simple. The US
soldiers who organized the Hamlet Evaluation Survey and the North Vietnamese soldiers who made
unrealistically optimistic reports were not necessarily dishonorable men. The ethical values embodied
in both of their military cultures defined reassuring superiors as obligatory behavior. Reassuring
others is often virtuous, but when it includes imparting false information up the chain of decision
making, it becomes unethical because it does not
work. 9 Reassuring others becomes morally virtuous
when it is based on accurate information—it is the
basis for the trust from which cohesion emerges.
Integrity and Cohesion
There are two kinds of cohesion—horizontal and
vertical. Horizontal cohesion is the product of bonding among junior military personnel who come
to believe they can depend on their comrades to
do their jobs competently, to carry their shares of
the burdens, and to watch each other’s backs. There
is no room for deception among the members of a
rifle squad, a gun section, or the crew of an aircraft.
Their interdependence involves life and death in
combat. A team member who shades the truth is a
menace to his comrades and will find himself extruded (forced out of the group). He may, in fact,
for administrative reasons remain with his comrades physically, but no one will trust him or confide in him.
Vertical cohesion is the complex process that links
primary groups to larger units and ultimately to the
armed force and the nation. It begins with members of primary groups learning that they can trust
leaders at the next higher echelon to command competently, to do everything possible to assure their
success and survival, to not abandon them on the
battlefield, and to send or lead them on honorable
missions. Leaders who behave competently, tell the
truth, keep their word, and take care of their troops
earn trust and build vertical cohesion. This is not
easy. Sometimes it may appear to be easier and more
appropriate to withhold information from subordinates or even lie to them. Leaders who yield to
this temptation lose their believability and compromise vertical cohesion in their units.
Integrity and Institutional Self-Examination
One of the most useful aspects of integrity in an
armed force is that it makes it possible for its members to look objectively at themselves, their policies, and their performance. For a military organization to maintain its effectiveness during a time
of rapid technological change it must be receptive
to factual feedback so that it can stay in an active
learning posture. Armed forces have a reputation
for conservatism, for failing to integrate the lessons
of experience with evolving political and technological developments. There have been two historical exceptions—the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) and
the German Wehrmacht of 1933 to December 1941
(Exhibit 6-3). These forces valued truth in reporting, accepted and made profitable use of bad news,
and created a climate of support for commanders
that made them feel sufficiently secure to report
shortcomings in their units. As a consequence the
high command and subordinate commanders were
able to work together realistically to enhance the
capabilities of their armies. These two armies repeatedly defeated adversaries superior in numbers
and materiel.
A third army, that of the United States, may join
the pre-1942 Wehrmacht and the IDF as an active
learning organization if former US Army chief of
staff General Gordon Sullivan’s policies persist.
Sullivan saw the US Army in the mid-1990s as living and thriving in a state of perpetual change. 10
Whether the US Army can fulfill General Sullivan’s
vision depends on the degree to which his successors can integrate integrity into its ways of conducting its business. Integrity has been in short supply
since the 40-fold expansion of the US Army in World
War II, but a renaissance is in progress. 11
The first event in the rebirth of the US Army took
place in 1970 when the Army War College Study on
Military Professionalism revealed the extent to which
integrity had been supplanted by careerism and
“looking good.”12,13(p116) General Westmoreland found
these data to be uncongenial, and suppressed the report for 13 years. 14(p112) Suppressing facts that did not
“look good” reflected the lack of integrity that permeated the military culture since the 1940s. But the
authors of the Study stood for integrity against the
culture, and they were the wave of the future.
In 1979 General Edward C. Meyer became chief
of staff of the US Army. Meyer was the first chief of
staff who had not served in World War II. He began
the process of breaking free from the values that
had evolved in the 1940s. One of his acts was to tell
one of the authors of the Study, Walter Ulmer (by
164
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
EXHIBIT 6-3
THE WEHRMACHT OF 1933 TO 1942
Although there exists a stereotype that Germans, and particularly German soldiers, are compliant and unquestioning in their obedience to orders, the facts since 1813 do not support this view. The defining characteristic of the German Army since the early 19th century was a commitment by each officer to develop, mentor,
and support his subordinates. 1,2 Junior officers trusted their superiors and knew they could safely ask for help
and advice; seniors expected their junior leaders to use their initiative and were prepared to back them up. As
a consequence, during the wars of the 19th and 20th centuries, junior officers were quick to seize and exploit
opportunities. The Wehrmacht was created in great haste in 1933 (after Hitler became Chancellor) and grew
rapidly until 1939 when it was committed to the invasion of Poland in September. With a force of 1,250,000
men and 2,800 small tanks,3(pp19ff,61,90ff) it defeated the 600,000 man Polish Army in 35 days at the modest cost of
8,082 German dead. 4,5(p120)
Immediately upon completion of the campaign, the German high command, the Wehrmacht, called on subordinate commanders to criticize the policies, tactics, equipment, training, and organization prescribed by the
general staff, and the competence, energy, and performance of their own units. The climate of mutual trust
enabled the officers to give frank and open replies that were the basis for an energetic reformation of the
German Army. 5(pp130–135),6 This reformation was sufficiently effective to enable the Wehrmacht to defeat the armies
of France, Great Britain, Belgium, and the Netherlands—with a combined strength 50% greater than the
Wehrmacht and numerical and qualitative superiority in tanks, artillery, aircraft, and fortifications—in 47 days
(10 May–25 June 1940) at a cost of just over 27,000 German dead. 7(pp313–314)
The Wehrmacht went on to conquer Yugoslavia, Greece, and most of Russia in 1 year. It required the combined
efforts of the Soviet Union, the United States, and the British Empire, with a total population and industrial
capacity seven-fold that of Germany, to finally defeat an army in which trust and honesty had been its strongest assets. To be sure, other factors vitiated the psychological strength of the Wehrmacht. Most important was
a political climate pervaded by suspicion. Adolf Hitler did not trust his military leaders, and kept them under
surveillance. After his army was halted before Moscow in December 1941, Hitler took personal control of the
armed forces, refused his generals the right to maneuver, and insisted on slavish obedience to hold every inch
of ground seized. Coupled with the inexorable growth in military strength of its opponents, the German armed
forces collapsed. 8
Sources: (1) Nelson JT II. Auftragstaktik: A case for decentralized battle. Parameters. Sept 1987;17(9):22–27. (2) Mathews LJ.
The overcontrolling leader. Army. Apr 1996;46(4):31–36. (3) Chamberlain P., Doyle HL, Jentx TL. Encyclopedia of German
Tanks of World War II. New York: Arco; 1978: 19–20, 28–31, 58–61, 90–91. (4) US Department of the Army. Early Campaigns of
World War II. West Point, NY: US Military Academy; 1951: 1–21. (5) Kennedy RM. The German Campaign in Poland (1939).
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1956. Department of the Army Pamphlet 20-255. (6) Murray W. The German response to victory in Poland: A case study in professionalism. Armed Forces & Society. 1980;7(2):285–298. (7) Taylor T.
The March of Conquest: The German Victories in Western Europe—1940. New York: Simon and Schuster; 1958. (8) Goerlitz W.
Battershaw B, trans. History of the German General Staff 1657–1945. New York: Praeger; 1959: 406.
then a lieutenant general commanding III Corps),
to organize a center for leadership excellence, and
to report directly to him. He promoted to four-star
rank several younger officers who had been battalion commanders during the Vietnam War. These
men initiated a number of reforms (Exhibit 6-4) in
human dimensions—the ways in which people treat
each other—some of which gave integrity a chance
to prosper in the American military culture.
The reform movement made rapid strides and
produced the superb army that carried out Operation Just Cause14 and Operation Desert Storm. 15
General Sullivan carried the movement forward and
added the dimension of living with change. But interviews this author conducted in the mid-1990s
indicated that the movement has lost momentum
as a result of the anxiety generated by downsizing
and as a result of inadequate funding.
It is important that integrity thrive. Without it
honor is a platitude, trust is impossible, and cohesion a chimera. It is a mistake to assume that digitized information exchange can supplant integrity
in reporting. In the first place, electronic communications often fail, and in the second place, much of
the information shared by digitized systems is put
into the systems by humans. Behaving with integrity is not easy; putting duty first is a never-ending
exercise in moral courage. Because integrity is an
165
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
operationally essential value in a military culture,
it is incumbent on the culture to arrange its contingencies of reinforcement to reward and protect
those who behave with integrity.
Because integrity is a totally human dimension
of military effectiveness, it requires thousands of
individual decisions each day. Similarly, taking care
of one’s subordinates requires thousands of decisions. Together these decisions, many of them difficult, constitute the honor of a military institution.
Taking Care of Subordinates
The most consistent value expressed in the regulations that have governed the US Army for more
than 220 years is the obligation of leaders to attend
to the personal, professional, and familial welfare
of their subordinates. 16 Taking care of subordinates
is a crucial component of honor for the same reason that integrity is—it works. The actions a leader
takes on behalf of his subordinates’ personal welfare build trust, solidify vertical cohesion, and free
the service member to focus on developing his competence as a soldier. The professional welfare of
military personnel comprises all aspects of training, military schooling, civilian education, and preparing subordinates for advancement. There is an
obvious direct connection between subordinates’
professional welfare and the efficiency of the unit.
The linkage between the service member, the unit,
and the family has emerged as crucial to operational
readiness as the percentage of married soldiers has
increased rapidly in the professional force. Attention to the welfare of subordinates is not a luxury;
it is an essential element of military honor. It is part
of the leader’s obligation to his personnel to keep
them focused on developing their competence to
fight and to survive.
Though the duty of leaders to attend to their subordinates’ welfare has been a part of US Army reguEXHIBIT 6-4
REFORMS IN THE HUMAN DIMENSIONS OF THE US ARMY
Many US military leaders pay lip service to the importance of the individual soldier, the soldier’s family, and
the attitudes soldiers and their families have toward the US Army. Then the same leaders reduce funding of
programs or withdraw emphasis from behavior that reflects respect for soldiers and their families. General
Meyer and his reformers enacted a series of changes in these human dimensions between 1979 and 1989 that
made it safer to tell the truth, to be interested in military matters, and to trust one’s comrades and superiors.
Training
National Training Center: Highly realistic force-on-force exercises in which lasers indicate hits by
individual, crew-served, and vehicle-mounted weapons.
Individual training: Pictorial soldiers’ manuals suited to self-paced training and to soldiers teaching each
other.
Noncommissioned Officer (NCO) Educational System: A series of four progressively more advanced professional schools (Primary Leadership Development Course, Basic Noncommissioned Officer Course, Advanced Noncommissioned Officer Course, and the Sergeant Majors Academy) for aspirants to successive
NCO grades.
Unit Manning
COHORT (COHesion, Organization Readiness, and Training) System: Soldiers stay together through basic
and advanced training and in the same battalion for the three years of their enlistments.
Leadership
Command tours: 18 months for company commanders; 2 years for higher commands.
Relationships across ranks: Respect, trust, open communications, empowerment of subordinates.
Competence: Driven by subordinates’ demands for more challenging experiences.
Family Support
Army Family Support Command: Organization and coordination of resources for families.
Family Support Groups: Link unit, soldier, and family in a mutually supportive structure.
166
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
lations since the 1770s, it has often been ignored or
misunderstood. During the 19th century many commanders despised their subordinates. 17 Some commanders were honored because of their indifference
to casualties. For example, commanders during the
Civil War often favored subordinates whose units
had sustained heavy casualties over those who
spared their troops—irrespective of the tactical
achievements of the units. The rationale was that if
a commander could keep his unit fighting in spite
of casualties, he was an effective leader. This notion continued into World War I during which it was
reinforced by French and British values. 18 There
were still some US commanders in World War II and
Korea who believed in spending lives without a
backward look. 19
During the 20th century certain military personnel policies derived from the larger culture were
adopted in the name of efficiency or fairness. These
policies were based on ethical considerations but
were, in fact, deleterious to the welfare of junior
personnel. Frederick Taylor’s ideas about personnel being interchangeable was the basis for an individual replacement system in World War I in
which people were treated as spare parts for the
military machine. 20 Individual equity was the basis
for the World War II policy of rotating men from
combat zones on the basis of points they earned as
individuals for time overseas, wounds, and
awards. 21 Concern over protecting soldiers from
combat stress breakdown led to fixed-length tours
during the Korean War. 22,23(pp49–50) To assure equality
of opportunity for military professionals command
tours were limited to 6 months during the Vietnam
War. 24,25 The ethical foundations of these policies
were sound in an abstract sense, but all proved
to be inappropriate for the military situations to
which they were applied. Individual replacement,
fixed-length tours, and short command assignments
damaged the combat competence of units and the
ability of military personnel to resist combat
stress. 23(p54),26 Rotating soldiers in and out of units
on an individual basis kept those units from developing the proficiency and teamwork that would
have made them effective in protecting the lives
of their members. Individual replacement and
rotation policies denied soldiers the social supports
of prolonged association during and after combat
with others they knew. These policies were unethical from a military perspective because they did not
work.
The reforms initiated in the US Army in the 1980s
went beyond the traditional concepts of welfare that
had focused on minimizing subordinates’ distress
and providing some basic comforts. They included
a renewed emphasis on helping service members
to become more effective soldiers, and a comprehensive program to include familial welfare as part
of command responsibilities. This was a complex
business. More intensive and realistic training
strengthened their subordinates’ professional abilities, confidence, and pride; but also increased their
fatigue, pain, and misery, and put additional strain
on their relationships with their families. Integrating families with units, and providing support for
family members, required new skills and sensitivities of leaders. Both of these developments put additional demands on leaders’ integrity and devotion to
duty. Honorable behavior on the part of the leader
with respect to taking care of his subordinates involves five principal spheres of action: (1) competent
leadership, (2) developing subordinates’ competence, (3) administrative and logistical support, (4)
caring for families, and (5) balancing the mission
against troops’ welfare.
Competent Leadership
The ground force commander’s first obligation
to his subordinates is to lead them intelligently.
Honor requires that he be technically competent
with respect to combat operations such as tactics,
fire support, and gunnery; to field craft such as camouflage, field fortifications, and stealthy movement;
to health issues such as field sanitation, first aid,
protection against vermin, and climatic adaptation;
and to logistical support such as field messing,
aerial resupply, and combat evacuation. The competencies required in the US Navy and US Air Force
differ in specifics, but the principle is the same. The
leader’s task is to lead his people into the valley of
the shadow of death and out the other side, having
accomplished the mission on the way. Honor demands that he spare no effort to become competent,
and that his superiors spare no effort to develop
his competence.
One of the reasons that US ground forces performed poorly in many cases in the wars in Korea
and Vietnam was that thinking and talking about
technical military matters were unfashionable in
many parts of the US Army for several decades following World War II. 7 The author knew many field
grade officers during the late 1950s and early 1960s
who prided themselves on avoiding involvement
with such basic technical topics as the siting of
machine guns, the effects of weather on the trajectories of artillery shells, and the lubrication and
adjustment of the mechanical parts of vehicles and
167
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
weapons. They were, perhaps, copying the contemporary civilian managerial model of being “generalists,” and leaving the technical details to underlings. Or perhaps they were intimidated by the
growing complexity of military technique and technology. Whatever the cause for their withdrawing
from the details of their profession, these same officers were brigade and battalion commanders and
S-3s (operations and training officers) in Vietnam.
Knowing little about the technical aspects of their
profession they were unable to supervise the training and performance of their subordinates. Exhibit
6-5 summarizes three not atypical cases from the
author’s experience.
For a commander of troops in combat to be professionally incompetent is a dishonorable betrayal
of his subordinates. Similarly, for a senior commander or personnel management official to assign
an incompetent person to such a command is dishonorable. Troops cannot repose trust and confidence in a leader who does not know what to do,
so vertical cohesion becomes impossible. The solution is to build an ethic of commitment to one’s subordinate leaders’ success, a solution that demands
technical and tactical competence at all echelons of
leadership.
Developing Subordinates’ Competence
Developing subordinates’ competence is as much
a matter of honor as the leader’s own competence.
Being an effective trainer entails personal exposure
to risk, uncertainty, and discomfort. As long as war
is a component of the cultural repertory of a nation
EXHIBIT 6-5
EFFECTS OF COMMANDERS’ TECHNICAL INCOMPETENCE
The following three examples all occurred in Vietnam in the months prior to Tet 1968, and demonstrate the
critical importance of commanders’ technical knowledge when it comes to mission completion and the safety
of their troops.
Example 1: One division artillery commander in Vietnam told a newly arrived field grade officer never to
allow troops in his battalion to fire shells that landed on friendly troops or villages. Yet this commander,
whose prior experience in the field artillery consisted of several years in public relations, was oblivious of the
fact that there was neither the know-how nor the equipment for meteorological data correction in any of the
battalions under his command, and that all of the battalions in his command had dismantled their topographical survey sections. He was commanding a force that had eliminated two of the most useful techniques for
controlling the trajectories of artillery shells by making adjustments for the effects of weather and by locating
the distance and direction from the battery to the target exactly. Fire inevitably fell on friendly forces and
villages, sometimes with civilian casualties. He was adamant that someone be held responsible, although
oftentimes no one was at fault. All he understood was that his general did not want friendly fire incidents; he
had no idea how to prevent them other than to prohibit them. The incidents continued, the commander completed his tour, and was decorated for heroism and for meritorious achievement.
Example 2: An infantry battalion commander in the same division in Vietnam whose companies were defending a firebase said that, “No one could live through the wall of steel” his troops would put up against anyone
attacking the base. One night the base was attacked, and air observers reported that all of the infantrymen’s
fire was going up into the sky, not parallel to the ground where it would hit enemy soldiers. The battalion
commander had authorized the turn-in of the tripod mounts with their traversing and elevating mechanisms
for machine guns unaware that they are essential for stable, grazing fire from defensive positions. He had
believed that doing this would “lighten the load” of his men. His men, firing their weapons from the shoulder
while crouching in their holes, could only send bullets into the sky. Fortunately the attacking force was few in
number; otherwise the firebase probably would have been overrun.
Example 3: An officer commanding an artillery battalion in another division in Vietnam told the author that
he never used more than one, rather than all, of his 18 guns when firing on the enemy because he feared being
relieved for hitting a village or friendly troops, and he did not know how to control the fires of more than one
gun. Infantrymen he supported counted on him to fire his whole battalion at enemy forces, and they died
because the fires from his battalion did not send fragments flying wherever the enemy troops were hiding.
The commander completed his tour without arousing criticism.
168
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
the honorable path is to train realistically. Training
for ground combat troops and for crews of ships
and aircraft must be challenging, grueling, and
state-dependent. The latter term means that if the
skills and techniques learned are to be available in
combat or other crisis, those skills must be acquired
in an emotional climate similar to combat or crisis.
Such training is dangerous and expensive, and
it poses an ethical dilemma. The more realistic the
training the more likely it is that trainees will be
injured or killed. Honor requires that commanders
accept the danger and expense. Cutting corners on
realism results in diminished practical skill, emotional steadiness, and confidence in battle. An instructor or a leader training his subordinates has to
be with the trainees and experience the risk and
discomfort of the training situation. He also is at
risk because of his responsibility for his troops.
Accepting responsibility for training risks is yet
another example of putting duty before personal
interests.
Commanders are appropriately held accountable
for deaths or injuries that occur during training. In
response they have, again appropriately, sought to
minimize the likelihood of such accidents. The most
effective way of obviating training accidents is to
eliminate gunfire, minimize the use of motor vehicles, never train at night—in short, to water down
training experiences to the point that they bear no
resemblance to combat. This is unethical, but if the
contingencies of reinforcement are such that commanders know that a training casualty will end their
careers, then it is the senior policy maker, not the training commander, who is guilty of unethical conduct.
Most commanders use safety officers in any exercise involving gunfire. Safety officers are not to concern themselves with the accuracy, speed, or tactical
validity of gunfire; they are to focus exclusively on
seeing that no bullet or shell is fired that will endanger anyone. On the face of it this is a wise and ethical
measure. However, it has often evolved in practice
into placing the blame for any mistake made by
members of the unit undergoing training on the safety
officer—usually the junior officer in the unit or a junior officer borrowed from another unit. One of the
most honorable officers known to the author was
an infantry battalion commander who routinely
took his troops through live-fire exercises in demanding settings. He declared, “I am the safety officer for
all live fire.” He could not, of course, perform the
duties of all the safety officers required for his training programs, but he could and did accept the responsibility. By his example he inspired his subordinate
leaders to adopt the same ethical posture.
Administrative and Logistical Support
The leader’s duty to attend to his subordinates’
welfare entails administrative and logistical as well
as combat action. To spare his subordinates anxiety
in garrison as well as on campaign the ethical commander trains, organizes, and arranges for the supervision of the staff sections that administer pay,
leave, and personnel actions; that provide lodging,
food, water, and clothing; that repair and maintain
equipment; and that treat the sick and injured. Some
members of support elements often develop subcultural values based on their perception that their
routines are important in and of themselves, and
that serving soldiers’ needs is an irritating intrusion. Leaders of administrative and maintenance
units have the difficult job of making the efficient
performance of clerical and mechanical jobs a matter of honor. The approach that seems to work best
is to reward professionalism and competence, to
give clerks and mechanics ownership of the mission and opportunities to see how their efforts affect the efficiency of their supported units, and to
devote special attention to their personal, professional, and familial welfare. Commanders of line
units, for their part, have a duty to insist on firstrate performance by service troops.
Caring for Families
One of the most difficult tasks facing leaders and
commanders is taking care of the families of the
personnel in their units. Family members with a
sense of belonging to the unit and a belief that its
leaders will take care of them as well as the service
member enhance the efficiency of the unit in three
ways. First, family members who feel they are part
of the unit are more willing to share the service
member’s time and energy with the unit. Second,
family members who use the resources of the unit
to help them cope do not distract the service member by making him anxious about his family. Third,
families who feel supported by the unit are likely
to take pleasure from the achievements of the unit
and encourage the service member in his professional activities. A family whose members feel integrated with the unit is a combat multiplier. 27
Frequently junior personnel marry and the
couples have children with little understanding of
child care, household maintenance, and financial
management. Families that cannot cope can become
sources of extreme anxiety for service members.
This anxiety can distract the service member from
training, and the unit can become the focus for hos169
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
tility engendered by the stress in the family. When
a service member deploys for a protracted period,
particularly to a dangerous situation, the spouse’s
anxieties can lead to maladaptive behavior. This is
especially likely when senior command gratuitously withholds information from spouses about
the purpose and duration of the deployment. When
a spouse loses control and the service member
learns about it, he can be overcome with helpless
anxiety, and become ineffective.
On the other hand, family members who trust
the service member’s leaders to take care of him,
and who have learned to cope on their own and
with the help of the military, can enhance his effectiveness. Such a family sends the service member
off to work each day, and off on deployment, feeling confident that the family approves of what he
is doing and can take care of itself. The ways to generate trust in a family are to open communications,
to treat the family members with trust and respect,
and to tell them the truth. Fortunately, these are the
same values and leadership behavior that build
morale and cohesion among service members. 27
Family support groups have proved to be useful to
both families and units. Preconditions for their success are that they be organized on a democratic basis rather than in accordance with the service members’ ranks, and that the command support their
EXHIBIT 6-6
INFORMATION FOR FAMILIES—OPERATION JUST CAUSE
The deployment for Operation Just Cause, the invasion of Panama in December 1989, was organized under
conditions of great haste and secrecy to prevent the Panamanian dictator from preparing his defense forces.
Personnel were told to report to their units, then forbidden contact with their spouses. From initial notification to their landing in Panama by parachute or aircraft took less than 24 hours in some units.
In one division, headquarters personnel refused to provide spouses any information about their soldiers for 3
days, even though the media were reporting on the events. Thus the spouses learned what was going on from
television news broadcasts, rather than from command. Those spouses felt betrayed and alienated from command 3 months later when the units returned.
In another division the commanding general, assistant division commander, and chief of staff took turns answering spouses’ questions authoritatively. They did not divulge information that might endanger the soldiers, but they told what they could, explained why they had to be reticent on some subjects, and promised
more complete information as soon as it was safe. They published newsletters daily, they and their spouses
went to meet with family support groups, and they energized the post administrative services to make themselves available to the spouses. The one battalion from this division was in the heaviest fighting, took the
worst casualties, and its members trusted their commanders. Though some soldiers left the US Army, those
who remained had confidence in command and were ready for another deployment.
Source: Kirkland FR, Ender MG. Analysis of Interview Data from Operation Just Cause. Washington, DC: working paper
available from Department of Military Psychiatry, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research: June 1991.
activities with funds, facilities, information, and
respect. 28 Exhibit 6-6, from the author’s field notes
from Panama, illustrates two approaches to handling information flow to families.
There is therefore nothing arcane about the process of looking after families; treating them in an honorable manner with the respect appropriate to members of the military community is usually effective.
Balancing the Mission Against Troops’ Welfare
There are times when there are conflicts between
two actions, both of which are honorable but which
are incompatible. The following is an example
known to the author. During a large-scale maneuver in the mid-1980s, a division commander required battalion commanders to justify in writing
each man who did not participate in the maneuver.
Brigade commanders imposed yet more stringent requirements in an effort to look the toughest. Battalion
commanders and their staffs had too many demands
on them to write the justifications for leaving anyone
behind, so they took men on a 3-week field exercise with limbs in casts, with injuries that would
certainly be exacerbated by duty in the field, with
wives (who also had other children at home) within a
week of delivering babies, and with completed elimination actions awaiting only discharge orders.
170
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
The conflict between the honorable goal of putting duty first conflicted with the honorable goal
of taking care of the troops. There need not have
been a conflict. Common sense would have excluded some soldiers from participation. But the
military culture had two components that overrode
common sense. The first component was distrust
of subordinate commanders. 29(pp33,84–90) This led to
the requirement for a justification in writing.
The second component is the pervasive “can-do”
ethic that emerged in the late stages of World War
II—”The difficult we do immediately, the impossible takes a little longer.” This sort of slogan can
build morale in service support units (such as US
Navy rear area construction battalions—where it
originated), but it does not work with commanders
of professional combat units. 13(p164) It leads to inadequate resources, crushed morale, and broken careers for the honorable few who stand up and say,
“That is not possible.”
In the culture of fear that pervaded the US Army
after World War II, many career officers became
progressively more reluctant to resist the imposition of an unreasonable requirement. 12,30,31 The “cando” ethic has led senior commanders to accept without question any requirement that comes out of
Congress or the Pentagon, and to impose it on the
units that do the work. The culture of the US Army
into the 1980s was one in which habitual demand
overload was the way of life. 29(pp72–74),30 Company
commanders had the job of deciding which demands to ignore and which to fulfill, because their
superiors did not have the moral fortitude to set
priorities and reject requirements that were inappropriate for their subordinate units.
Returning to our discussion of the division that
took men with broken limbs to the field, the junior
personnel in the division knew that soldiers were
being mistreated. They saw this as proof that their
senior officers lacked moral courage. They were
being asked to give their all to build the reputations
of men who were not sufficiently honorable to use
common sense. The wrongdoing quickly became
known throughout the battalions, and the soldiers
were caught between their professional pride and
the knowledge that they could not trust their officers to take care of them. Some acted out their resentment during the 3-week exercise in ways that,
appropriately, embarrassed their commanders. For
instance, sometimes units would “disappear,”
sometimes soldiers would stand in the open and
laugh at their “attackers,” or ignore them. Commanders could do nothing about it at the time and
later was too late.
During the exercise one brigade commander
demonstrated that honor was not dead in the division when he learned from his rear detachment
commander that one young mother had fallen seriously ill. The colonel sent his helicopter to fetch her
spouse, a private, from the exercise and send him
to stay with his wife and look after their children.
Just as the morally querulous conduct of other officers was known throughout the division, word of
this colonel’s actions spread rapidly. He earned substantial credibility with junior personnel. However,
he had to contend with the jealousy of colleagues
who accused him of posturing to his troops. Thus
although he had behaved in an honorable manner,
he was charged with a dishonorable motive by
many of his peers.
Perversions of Honor
There have been examples in the foregoing discussion of honorable and dishonorable behavior. It
is usually possible to discern which is which. More
insidious are situations in which the term “honor”
is used to cloak dishonorable, or at least incompetent, conduct, as the following example demonstrates.
In July 1915 the French Commander-in-Chief, General Joseph Joffre, was putting pressure on the commander of the British Expeditionary Force, Field
Marshal Sir John French, to mount an attack toward
Loos over a broad expanse of flat, open terrain into
the teeth of well-constructed, heavily armed, and
forewarned German defenses. General Joffre had a
fantasy of ending the war with one great offensive.
He said that the British would find “particularly
favorable ground” in the vicinity of Loos—an outright lie. Sir John French was afraid that if he did
not go along with Joffre, the latter would arrange
through his government to have him dismissed.
When Joffre could no longer deny the unfavorable
nature of the ground, he said the attack was vital
“to the honor … of the Allied cause.”32(p126)
That the term honor was used in this way says a
great deal about the perversions of that concept in
the French and British armies in the first half of the
20th century. French and British senior officers habitually lied to each other, to their allies, and to their
subordinates. 32,33(pp82ff,92ff) They falsified reports, took
council of their own ambitions to the detriment of
their troops and their cause, dismissed juniors who
were so unwise as to offer suggestions that proved
to be correct, and were professionally incompetent
to a degree that is hard to imagine. 32,33(pp80–109) They
used “honor” as a bastion behind which to refuse
171
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
EXHIBIT 6-7
IS THE UNIT THE TEAM, OR IS THE OFFICER CORPS THE TEAM?
This exhibit describes two cases known to the author of leaders who were punished for not being team players.
Case 1: During the 1970s, the commanding general and command sergeant major of an Army reserve command
stated that they sought to demonstrate their dissatisfaction with the quality of the Active Army personnel assigned
to the command. Their motivation remains obscure, but their plan was to summarily eliminate from the service a
Filipino NCO from the Active Army who had failed in his primary military occupational specialty (MOS) and was
on a rehabilitation assignment after being retrained as a supply sergeant. The reserve command staff assigned him
to a combat support company, expecting him to fail in his new specialty and thereby give them a pretext for firing
him. The company commander immediately had problems with supply. His new sergeant had only instructional
knowledge of supply procedures and no practical experience. He was also limited in his mastery of the English
language. He failed inspections, was late with reports, and did not fully understand procedures. The captain complained up the chain of command and was told to work with the sergeant. He did, and was making progress when
the sergeant major of the reserve command told him to initiate elimination action quickly. If the sergeant had
enough time in service he would be entitled to a hearing before a board of officers, and those who wanted to fire
him would have to prepare a case that could withstand cross-examination. If the captain put an elimination dossier
together quickly the sergeant could be discharged administratively without appeals. The captain said the sergeant
was performing better and that elimination was inappropriate. The next day the captain received an order from his
battalion commander to initiate the elimination proceedings. He did as he was told, but in his evaluation of the
sergeant he used language that made it clear that his performance did not warrant elimination. This stopped the
general’s manifestly dishonorable project. The general then directed the captain’s battalion and group commanders to relieve him from command, to give him an adverse efficiency report (which effectively ended the captain’s
military career), and to organize a high-ranking team to conduct a change of command property inventory. The
team left the captain with a $25,000 report of survey, for which he was held pecuniarily liable. The captain resigned
from the US Army, his troops believed he was treated shabbily but they had their own investments in the unit, and
the supply sergeant stayed in the US Army. The entire chain of command, who were dependent on the general for
good reports, loyally supported the general’s unethical conduct.
Case 2: In 1967 in Vietnam, a draftee private in a direct support artillery battalion was serving as a fire support team
chief for a rifle company. He was adjusting artillery and mortar fire for his company—doing the jobs of a lieutenant
and a staff sergeant—and he was doing well. The infantrymen trusted him. One day he got a letter from a friend at
home that said his mother, who owned the trailer in which his wife and daughter were living, had thrown the
young family out and sold the trailer. The friend did not know where the soldier’s wife and little girl were. The
soldier was distraught. He wanted leave to go find his family and resettle them. His first sergeant sent him to the
Red Cross, which refused to authorize an emergency leave because no one was in a health crisis. The battalion
executive officer (XO) learned of the problem and sent the soldier to the chaplain to get authorization for a morale
leave. The chaplain called the XO and said, “This kid has a serious problem. If we send him home, he may not come
back. Then whoever authorized his leave will look like an ass, and it isn’t going to be me.” The XO was furious at
the chaplain for dodging his responsibility, and stormed into the division personnel office and asked the officer in
charge to cut orders for a 30-day morale leave, which he did. At the end of his 30-day leave, the soldier did not
return. His superiors questioned the XO’s judgment. A week later the soldier returned. He had found his family,
gotten them a place to live, and was ready to go back to work adjusting fire for his infantrymen. The soldier, thanks
to his intelligence and hard work, was able to carry out an officer’s responsibilities—but not when he was obsessed
with worry about his family. The mission required that he have his mind on his job, so the XO took action to get the
distraction resolved. The XO got an adverse efficiency report, the chaplain got a favorable report, and the private
was a sergeant when he came home. There was no observable effect on the unit, but the XO acted honorably in a
dishonorable culture, and paid the price. Ultimately, in such a climate there will be fewer and fewer honorable
soldiers. This incident illustrates the danger of acting honorably in a dishonorable culture, and how the nominal
stewards of moral values can be corrupted by the culture.
to accept criticism of their actions and as an alternative to knowing what to do.
Honor is therefore a concept of which military
personnel in the 21st century must be wary; it has
been used as a cover for incompetence, failure, and
atrocities. A commander saying, “We don’t want to
let anyone know about this, it would tarnish the
honor of the brigade” really means “If this gets out
172
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
I will be relieved, so help me cover it up or I’ll cut
your throat on your efficiency report.”
Loyalty is often put forth as one of the key aspects of honor. Correctly construed as taking care
of one’s subordinates, and of carrying out missions
faithfully, loyalty is important. But in the US armed
forces since 1945 it has more often been construed
as a duty owed by subordinates to superiors—including a duty to cover up their superiors’ mistakes,
incompetence, and even criminal behavior (Exhibit
6-7). Failure in this type of “loyalty” marks the individual as “not a team player,” and usually leads
to a damaging evaluation. 5(pp225ff,294ff),34
Operationally effective honor rooted in integrity,
trust, commitment to duty, and care for subordinates is a powerful support for military personnel
who must perform emotionally aversive acts to accomplish a mission, and who must make difficult
ethical decisions in the midst of danger, privation,
and moral chaos. Each honorable act strengthens
the character of the individual who performs it, and
strengthens the culture of the unit to which that
individual belongs. Honor flourishes in a command
climate that fosters a sense of security, especially
among leaders. Conversely, threats, statistical measurements, competition, and covering up for superiors create the insecurity that undermines honor. If
people are sufficiently insecure, they will slip away
from the honorable course. As Edgar Z. Friedenberg
(a psychologist who focused on how school faculties colluded to keep adolescents in the social and
economic classes into which they had been born) put
it, “All weakness tends to corrupt; impotence corrupts
absolutely.”35 Trust, respect for subordinates, and
empowerment, on the other hand, create a sense of
security, belonging, and willingness to do the honorable thing. American military personnel tend to
be idealists; it is the job of senior leaders to create a
culture in which that tendency can blossom into
ethical and operationally effective behavior. 36
COMBAT ETHICS
There are three essential military purposes
served by an ethical system in combat: (1) restraining military personnel from committing atrocities,
(2) enabling people to carry out missions that may
require them to kill and perform other morally aversive acts, and (3) strengthening resistance to combat stress breakdown.
Restraining Military Personnel From
Committing Atrocities
Atrocities are violations by soldiers of the standards of behavior valued in their cultures, consonant with national objectives, and prescribed by
military regulations. Behavior considered from one
cultural perspective might be called an atrocity; the
same behavior in another cultural context could be
considered a moral duty. I am presenting this as
both a practical and a moral issue, because to do
less is to disregard its complexity and do a disservice to the leaders and fighters who have to make
moral judgments on the field of battle.
There are three ethical-operational issues to consider: (1) the process of defining an atrocity, (2) the
dynamics of atrocious behavior, and (3) ways of preventing atrocities.
National Objectives, Military Culture, and Atrocities
During the 20th century, definitions of appropriate conduct during wartime have varied radically.
The objectives of a particular war tend to be the
primary factors governing definitions of ethical as
compared to unethical behavior. In World War I,
German and American views of what constituted
lawful attacks on merchant vessels, especially by
submarines, differed so widely that the issue became one of the key factors bringing the United
States into the war. The US firebombing of
Dresden and the US use of nuclear weapons
against two Japanese cities have been the subjects of many years of ethical debate. German
soldiers were barbarous in their treatment of civilians during the invasion of Russia between
1941 and 1944, but their conduct was consonant
with national objectives and Nazi cultural values (Exhibit 6-8). Having no clear war aim was a
major problem for US military personnel during
the Vietnam War. They were reduced to adopting
the killing of North Vietnamese soldiers as the ethical purpose of the war. In the Bosnian conflicts of
the 1990s, raping the women and killing the men of
conquered populations were consonant with the
war aims of all three conflicting parties. Muslims,
Croatian Roman Catholics, and Serbian Eastern
Orthodox Christians were committed to the extermination of opposing ethnic groups.
Another example of behavior defined by Americans as an atrocity was the Japanese treatment of
American and Filipino soldiers during the Bataan
Death March (Exhibit 6-9). Americans called this event
an atrocity. After winning the war they tried the Japa173
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
EXHIBIT 6-8
GERMAN ATROCITIES ON THE RUSSIAN FRONT
As the Russo–German war (1941–1945) became more severe, German soldiers were beset by extraordinarily
harsh conditions, inadequately equipped and supplied for the terrain and weather in Russia, and faced a
tenacious and skillful adversary in a war defined as one of survival for Germany. 1(pp21–27) German soldiers had
their humanity put to a severe test. Ethics, cohesion, and the coercive system in the German Army were corrupted by, and subservient to, a harsh Nazi ideology that demeaned Russians. The result was that German
soldiers became brutal and rapacious in their treatment of Russian soldiers and civilians. Soldiers of the German Army, not just the SS (Schutzstaffel [protection echelon]), were under orders from the high command to
kill all guerrillas, saboteurs, political commissars, and Bolshevik agitators; to impose mass punishment on
villages suspected of harboring guerrillas; to exploit Russian civilians in any way required to support the war
effort; and to destroy everything in the event that they had to give up ground to the enemy. 1(pp106–141)
The ethical code under which German soldiers had been trained defined non-Germans as subhuman
(untermenschen) and maltreatment of them as virtuous. 1(pp133–136) They were authorized and required to be barbarous, and the stress of weather, terrain, privation, and the Russian resistance made them ready to impose
hardships on the populace in order to alleviate their own. The ethical code promulgated by the Nazi regime
specified that what we would call atrocities were “what was right” for German soldiers on the Russian front. 2
Sources: (1) Barton O. The Eastern Front, 1941–45. German Troops and the Barbarization of Warfare. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1986. (2) Browning C. Ordinary Men. New York: HarperCollins; 1992: 2, 55ff, 74–77, 130–131.
EXHIBIT 6-9
THE BATAAN DEATH MARCH
In the late 19th century, Japanese military leaders recognized that their army was “destined” to fight numerically superior enemies—Chinese, Russians, or Americans. They defined fighting to the death as the only honorable behavior. Surrender was the ultimate loss of honor. 1
In April 1942 an American and Filipino army of 76,000 surrendered to a Japanese force of 43,000. The Americans and Filipinos had surrendered because they were on the verge of death from starvation. Their commanders had brought them into the Bataan Peninsula 3 months earlier having made no preparations for their subsistence.
Much of the Japanese force in the Philippines was sent on other missions when the Americans surrendered.
They had few men with which to guard the prisoners, no transport to move them, and barely had enough food
to feed their own men. The prisoners had to walk 55 miles to the nearest railhead. Already near collapse from
hunger, they got little food from the Japanese. On the way 12,300 of them died. Some were shot or beaten to
death when they fell out of the column. 2 Given the Japanese contempt for warriors who surrender, it is remarkable that they provided any resources at all that allowed any of the prisoners to survive.
Sources: (1) Edgerton RB. Warriors of the Rising Sun. New York: Norton; 1997. (2) Whitman JW. Hell broke loose this morning: The first Philippine Campaign, 1941–42. Command. May 1997;43:18–29.
nese commander for war crimes and hanged him. 37
But from the Japanese perspective their treatment
of their prisoners was ethically correct.
In the last decade of the 20th century American
military and political leaders have adopted new
guidelines for ethical behavior by military personnel. Interviews with American soldiers who fought
in Panama in 1989 and in Iraq in 1991 indicate that
hatred of the enemy is no longer a goal of training. 38,39 With a different adversary every few months
soldiers instead have come to refer to the current
opponents as “the other side” or “the bad guys.”
Since the mid-1980s, incapacitation of an adversary’s ability to conduct effective military opera174
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
tions has replaced annihilation of personnel as the
principal tactical objective. 10,39(p125),40,41 American
military personnel are prepared to treat vanquished
soldiers with compassion and even as allies once
their capacity to fight has been neutralized. These
changes do not reflect a new and loftier morality;
instead they reflect national objectives that foresee
future amity with the armed force currently under
attack.
For example, postwar friendship was an objective of the US invasion of Panama in 1989. 42,43 This
objective was served by minimizing casualties
among the opposing forces. To achieve that purpose
senior commanders imposed narrowly restrictive
rules of engagement that entailed substantial additional risks for US military personnel. 38 (See Chapter 8, Just War Doctrine and the International Law
of War for a further discussion of the rules of engagement.) The ethical duty of commanders to protect their troops was subordinated to the national
objective.
In the Persian Gulf War in 1991 liberation of Kuwait from Iraqi occupation and elimination of the Iraqi
capability to conduct offensive operations were the
stated objectives. (Unstated objectives included protecting oil imports as well as other business interests
in Kuwait.) To achieve those objectives, US forces targeted military materiel, command and control facilities, and elements of economic and industrial strength.
Casualties among both military and civilian Iraqi personnel were minimized. 39(pp111ff,314ff)
Humane treatment of prisoners of war, sparing
the lives of noncombatants, respect for women, children, and the elderly, and protection of artistic and
cultural treasures are the usual components of most
modern military ethics. The values that dominate
in any set of ethical guidance for the military result
from a combination of what works in the conduct
of military operations and the prevailing values in
the larger society that provides the military personnel. In the final analysis, definitions of morality
have followed national objectives, and are likely to
continue to do so.
Dynamics of Atrocities
Most soldiers do not want to commit criminal
acts. However, the definition of criminal acts is culturally determined. The record of history indicates
that American soldiers are more likely to succor
conquered peoples than to abuse them. They are not
imbued with values such as those animating German soldiers toward Russians (see Exhibit 6-8) and
Japanese soldiers toward those who surrendered
during World War II (see Exhibit 6-9). Their values
make it psychologically painful for American soldiers to abuse the enemy. But they have been known
to get out of control and behave in unethical ways. 44
There are conditions that can increase the propensity of any soldiers to commit atrocities: physical hardship, psychological desperation, and military inadequacy. In addition, individuals may go
berserk, or a leader may initiate a chain of events
leading to barbarous behavior with an overt or implied order. The German soldiers on the Russian
Front were physically and psychologically desperate, and they were under orders to plunder and kill
civilians. The Japanese soldiers on Bataan were almost as hungry as their prisoners, and their commanders were under heavy pressure to leave the
Philippines for other missions. Sometimes the military situation makes it difficult for soldiers not to
behave outrageously.
The dynamics of atrocity are complex. A small
proportion of any population are sociopaths who
do not have empathy for others and who enjoy killing. However, sociopaths often do not trust others
and are unreliable. They tend to gravitate toward
isolated roles, such as snipers. (They can be useful,
but they complicate cohesion.) Historically, leaders
who have wanted to induce ordinary soldiers to
engage in barbarism have deceived them about the
unethical deeds they were to perform. Having once
done something they believed to be wrong, they
would be offered an escape from guilt by being
praised or accepted into a prestigious group. This
process alleviates guilt for a short time; to alleviate it
over the longer term requires that the soldiers continue to validate their initial atrocity by performing
others and by participating with the group in rituals of justification of their acts. Participants in atrocities need to form strong cohesive bonds with each
other because they are dependent on each other for
mutual validation. They reassure each other that their
behavior demonstrates that they are strong and virtuous and that others are weak. 45(pp208–214)
Soldiers who have experienced despair, grief, or
helplessness, and who have weak social supports
in their units, have an intense need to feel effective.
They are vulnerable to being recruited to perform
atrocities. The potentially most dangerous people
are leaders who feel inadequate and insecure. Their
sense of helplessness easily turns to hatred and a
search for someone or some group on whom they
can take vengeance. Incompetence, insecurity, and
social isolation increase the likelihood that a leader
175
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
will order, or acquiesce in, criminal acts. A classic
example from the Vietnam War is Second Lieutenant William Calley and his platoon at My Lai in 1968
(Exhibit 6-10).
From an operational standpoint, atrocities do not
work. They usually redound to the disadvantage
of the side committing them. Bombing of population centers in England and Germany in World War
II strengthened the resolve of the people being
bombed in both countries; the Japanese treatment
of prisoners on Bataan gave rise to the slogan “Remember Bataan!” among Americans; maltreatment
of one’s prisoners of war in any conflict makes one’s
adversaries more likely to fight to the death. In war
any policies or actions that increase the power of
the adversary or the danger to friendly troops are
unethical irrespective of whether they are inherently repugnant to national moral values.
EXHIBIT 6-10
THE MASSACRE AT MY LAI
Second Lieutenant William Calley, a man of limited ability,1(pp19–21) was in over his head1(pp26,28) as a platoon
leader in the Americal Division in Vietnam in 1968. He led a group of men who had experienced the death and
wounding of their comrades by mines and booby traps for many weeks. They never saw the enemy who was
killing them, and had no chance to fight back. Calley’s company, battalion, brigade, and divisional commanders did not have a clear idea how to conduct effective operations, and as a consequence were frustrated and
hostile toward Vietnamese civilians. 1(pp27,33,35)
Calley received an order that intimated1(pp21,44) that he was to tell his men to “kill every man, woman, child,
dog, cat” in My Lai, and he made his platoon carry it out. 2 Many of them did not think it was right, and sought
to avoid, or limit, participating in the slaughter. Calley was adamant, and threatened soldiers who hung back.
Nonetheless, one shot himself in the foot, at least one other snuck off, and some killed a few Vietnamese, then
quit. Several were active participants in the slaughter.
The crew of an American helicopter, commanded by Chief Warrant Officer Hugh C. Thompson, Jr., played a
role in stopping the massacre. Thompson landed his helicopter in the line of fire between Calley’s soldiers and
their intended victims, and rescued 11 of them. 3
Calley’s unit was credited with 128 bodies, some of them infants, but no one raised questions at the time.
American and Vietnamese investigators found 450 to 500 bodies. The massacre came to public light when a
helicopter door gunner, Ronald L. Ridenhour, left the US Army and started a letter-writing campaign to Congress. There were so many facts that the military eventually had to address the matter, but Calley was the only
one who was convicted of criminal action, although four enlisted men were discharged administratively. 4(pp257–
267) His superiors escaped serious punishment but their careers were terminated. 4(pp257–267)
Calley took the blame, and thus protected his superiors, but he was part of a command that was in ethical
collapse. His superiors were guilty of incompetence, of failing to take steps to support the morale and character of the men who were dying because of their incompetence, and of the incomparably cowardly act of suggesting—not ordering—that Calley commit an atrocity. 1 That they knew that they had behaved dishonorably
became apparent when evidence of their conspiring to cover up the massacre came to light. 4
Sources: (1) Hersh SM. My Lai 4: A Report on the Massacre and its Aftermath. New York: Random House; 1970. (2) Film,
Interviews with My Lai Veterans. Washington, DC: SANE. (3) Montgomery D. 30 years later, heroes emerge from shame of My
Lai massacre. Washington Post. 7 March 1998: A1, A10. (4) Hersh SM. Cover-up: The Army’s Secret Investigation of the Massacre
at My Lai 4. New York: Random House; 1972.
Prevention of Atrocities
It is appropriate that governments and commanders take steps to prevent soldiers from running amok. In an era of instant and comprehensive
public communications, controlling soldiers’ behavior can become an obsession because their behavior has the potential to embarrass governments.
Commanders rely on codes of military justice, military police, and summary field courts to compel
those who wield armed force to do so only in accordance with the values and objectives of the state.
But coercion has a more limited grasp on the
soldier’s actions than do his internal value system
and the mores of his unit. Discipline that is rooted
in mutual affiliation and trust between leaders and
subordinates is more reliable and resilient than enforced obedience. 46 The most effective way to assure
176
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
that military personnel behave in accordance with
national policy is for personnel policies, leader behavior, and other aspects of military culture to support vertical cohesion.
The leader has the primary, though not the only,
role in defining “what’s right” in a combat situation. 1(pp3ff) His ability to influence his subordinates’
perceptions of “what’s right,” and his ability to link
the value systems of small units with those of larger
units and ultimately with national objectives, depends
on the degree to which his subordinates perceive
him as trustworthy. Soldiers need to be secure in
the belief that their commanders are committed to
their welfare and success, and will support them
with every means at their disposal. Trust, rather
than coercion, codes of conduct, or slogans, offers
the most powerful means of assuring ethically appropriate behavior by troops in combat. 47,48
It is instructive and heartening that most soldiers
who inadvertently commit atrocities are horrified
and depressed. In cohesive units with an agreed
upon ethic of “what’s right,” they can confront their
horror and shame, and get help working through it
from their comrades and leaders. The primary
group will support the soldier who strayed from
“what’s right” in getting back on the path of ethical conduct. In most cases horizontally and vertically cohesive units will impose pressures on even
sociopathic soldiers to see that they conform to the
unit’s definitions of “what’s right.”
Enabling Military Personnel to Carry Out
Morally Aversive Acts
Whatever the national objectives may be, all wars
entail inflicting death and destruction. Most people
are reluctant to kill. 45(pp1–39) It is the ethical duty of
military leaders to create a moral and physical climate in which their members can kill designated
enemies readily and efficiently.
Killing another human being is the most traumatic experience a soldier encounters. It is more
stressful than fear of death or injury, and it is the
experience most likely to entail postcombat psychiatric disorders. 45 The most common protective behavior soldiers have used has been to refrain from
firing, or fire to miss. S.L.A. Marshall found that in
World War II fewer than 20% of American soldiers
fired their weapons in combat. 49(pp50–60,72–74) Though
Marshall’s data have been challenged,50 Grossman
has collected evidence that the majority of fighting
men have avoided firing at enemy soldiers since the
18th century when firearms were first widely available to armies. 45(pp5–11,19–28)
The author’s research has led him to conclude
that three factors are important in enabling American military personnel to kill. The first is confidence
that they have the skills and the equipment necessary to kill and have a reasonable chance of not being killed in the process. The second is the conviction that they are not alone on the battlefield and
that their comrades and leaders will not desert
them. The third is the belief that what they are doing is right. 11,38,51 These factors have psychological,
practical, and ethical dimensions.
Confidence in Skills and Equipment
Training is one key to confidence, and trust is another. Knowing what to do amidst the moral and
physical chaos of combat helps a fighting man to
maintain his moral and psychological orientation.
Realistic, state-dependent training can let a trainee
experience the danger and fear as well as the practical problems associated with performing his combat
skills so those skills will be available to him when he
is swamped by emotions in combat. While training
can build confidence in many dimensions, including
the mechanics of killing, American ethics do not permit trainees to experience the emotional effects of killing. Drills in the mechanics, and frequent use of the
language of killing, however, can desensitize most
people to the extent that when it becomes necessary,
they are more likely to be able to kill. 45(pp249–256)
Trust is the second component of confidence. An
individual comes to trust another as he experiences
the other as being worthy of trust. It is essential to
enable the members of the squads, teams, sections,
and crews in military organizations to perform the
grim and dangerous aspects of their jobs, including killing. When a service member kills, the reassurance and approval of comrades and leaders he
trusts will help him preserve his character. 36,45 To
develop trust among the members of primary
groups, it is necessary that they train together, experience stress and danger together, and learn that
they can count on their comrades to perform competently and to watch their backs. It is easy to recognize trust when it emerges in primary groups;
military competence becomes the transcendent criterion by which individuals judge each other. Previously salient factors, such as sex, race, religion,
and ethnicity, fall by the wayside. 28
Trust in leaders is equally important. Troops in
combat need leaders who are militarily competent,
who tell them the truth, who strike a reasonable
balance between the exigencies of the mission and
the welfare of their people, and who create a cred177
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
ible ethical climate in which to accomplish the actions the mission requires. This is a tall order. Most
junior military personnel are predisposed to trust
their leaders, and this both eases and complicates
the leaders’ tasks. Any deviation from subordinates’
expectations of competent, caring, and ethical behavior disillusions and confuses them. If a leader
wants to create a high-performing unit, he has to build
high expectations, then he has to live up to them.
Military leaders’ every act is scrutinized by those they
lead, as well as by their superiors and the general
public in this era of instantaneous communication. If
a leader pontificates about duty, honor, and country
when the circumstances of the combat situation entail burning the homes of civilians, making inflated
reports of success, and no clear-cut war aim, then trust
evaporates in the resulting ethical chaos.
Combatants’ Belief That They Are Not Alone on
the Battlefield
Because of technological progress in targeting
and in the lethality of weapons over the past century, military operations have been carried out by
progressively smaller groups of people operating
at greater distances from each other. The trend is
accelerating. Since 1945 bomber crews have fallen
from ten men to two; warship crews are only a
fourth as large for a given size of ship. 52–55 On some
contemporary battlefields an armored infantry
squad, a tank crew, or the crew of an artillery piece
EXHIBIT 6-11
PATHFINDERS IN IRAQ
The performance of Staff Sergeant Gary Rister’s three-man pathfinder team from 2-17 Cavalry, 101st Air Assault Divisional Reconnaissance Squadron, during the invasion of Iraq in 1991, is a good example of how
confidence based on trust can counteract isolation on the battlefield. Sergeant Rister’s team had the task of
setting up an electronic beacon in the Iraqi desert to guide the 101st Air Assault Division’s helicopters. There
were no friendly elements on the ground or in the air within 20 miles when the team got its beacon working.
They looked for a hiding place from which they could keep an eye on it. Suddenly they were taken under fire
by a platoon of about 30 Iraqis in several well-camouflaged bunkers. The three Americans assaulted and seized
the first bunker that had fired on them, captured the lieutenant in command, and sent him out of the bunker
carrying a white flag. The rest of the Iraqis fled across the desert. Sergeant Rister’s team had no fire support,
no air support, no backup, and no radio contact. In reality they were alone on the battlefield, but psychologically they were not isolated. They could have fled, but their comrades were counting on them. They knew how
to fight, that they could count on each other, and that they belonged to a squadron that would not abandon
them. With that knowledge, they attacked.
Source: Taylor TT. Lightning in the Storm: The 101st Air Assault Division in the Gulf War. New York: Hippocrene Books; 1994:
337–340.
may not have another friendly element anywhere
within its field of view. 46(pp16,18)
A sense of isolation in the midst of danger is demoralizing. The last thing a lonely soldier wants to
do is attract attention to himself by firing. If soldiers are to kill on a dispersed battlefield they need
to believe they are part of a group with leaders who
know where they are and will not abandon them.
Building this belief is the most important function of
an armed force in peacetime. Its foundation is trust
built up through honesty, respect, open communication, and mutual concern among peers and across
ranks. Many elements of the US armed forces have
succeeded in creating such a climate (Exhibit 6-11).
Building the conviction in a soldier that his leaders will not abandon him is an incremental process.
During peacetime training, junior personnel—and
junior leaders—observe the behavior of their commanders with respect to professional competence,
concern for their troops, and ethical integrity.
Deeds, not words, define the trustworthiness of a
leader. Leaders can demonstrate their competence
through their mastery of tactics in training situations, their readiness to come up with innovative
technical ideas that enhance the capability of equipment or that disrupt the “opposing forces,” and
their management of schedules so that their troops’
time and energies are used productively. These are
the criteria leaders’ superiors should use to evaluate them; they are certainly the criteria subordinates
will use to judge their worthiness to be obeyed.
178
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Combatants’ Belief That They Are Doing
“What’s Right”
Shay has described the destruction of a combatant’s
character in the moral vacuum created by the military culture in Vietnam. 1(pp5ff,9–21) He pointed out that
an army is a moral construction; that combatants
need a credible and appropriate ethical foundation
to sustain themselves psychologically. In collaboration with their leaders they create ethical systems,
strive to live up to them, and expect their leaders to
model them. Betrayal of ethical values by military
leaders can lead to a state of moral confusion that
affects performance in combat. Exhibits 6-1, 6-7, and
6-10 demonstrate how duty and loyalty become
meaningless concepts, reports are routinely faked,
and atrocities are more likely in times of moral confusion. Exhibit 6-12 is an example of ethical chaos
in the culture of a division in which the author
served in Vietnam in 1968.
Studies of Germans who committed atrocities
during World War II indicate that soldiers’ perceptions of “what’s right” are influenced by the military culture. Leaders are the primary channel by
which soldiers acquire these values. In the case of
German soldiers in Russia, Hitler, his High Command,
and most subordinate commanders advocated values that required soldiers to behave in ways Americans perceive to be atrocious. In the case of the US
division in Exhibit 6-12, senior leaders created frustration and fear in their subordinates because they
were unable to find their own moral bearings. They
tacitly encouraged junior soldiers to alleviate their
EXHIBIT 6-12
POT-SHOTTING CIVILIANS FROM HELICOPTERS
A divisional staff officer in Vietnam in 1968 was riding in a helicopter when the door gunners suddenly
opened fire on civilian workers on a tea plantation. He immediately ordered the gunners to cease fire. The
aircraft commander was indignant and said that all the crews fired at the workers in that plantation because
everyone knew the plantation owners paid off the Vietcong. He said that if a worker ran when he was fired at
it meant he was Vietcong and they would try to kill him. And anyway, it was good practice for the door
gunners. The staff officer reported this manifestly dishonorable and criminal behavior to the aviation battalion commander—who told him to mind his own business. He then reported it to the division chief of staff—
who said it was best not to interfere: “The helicopter crews are under a lot of stress, and we count on them.”
This is an example of a major command (18,000 men) in ethical collapse. The door gunners had approval from
the officers commanding their helicopter to engage in killing innocent people for fun. The aircraft commanders were mostly 19- to 22-year-old warrant officers whose commanders asked no questions about what the
gunners fired on. When the issue was placed before senior officers—the aviation battalion commander and the
divisional chief of staff—they were simply too busy, too tired, and too remote from moral considerations to
become involved. After all, the targets were “only” Vietnamese, and the gunners usually did not hit anyone.
feelings of impotence by attacking civilians.
When there is a moral vacuum in the command
and the military culture, perceptions of “what’s
right” emerge among junior personnel seeking to
create a moral foundation. Ethicists and military
professionals alike may be horrified at the moral
relativism inherent in junior personnel in each unit
working out their own version of “what’s right,”
and holding their leaders to it. In the author’s view,
however, it is heartening that unsophisticated junior fighters make spontaneous efforts to construct
a moral foundation for their participation in the war.
Definitions of “what’s right” during the war in Vietnam were remarkably consistent across units and
even across services in spite of the moral confusion
at the policy and senior command levels. 1,5,56–60 During the invasions of Panama and Iraq, for which the
general purposes and values were clearly articulated by the commanders-in-chief, units of the
ground forces embraced definitions of “what’s
right” that were closely linked to those purposes
and values. 38,39,61,62
Strengthening Resistance to Combat Stress
Breakdown
The record of American military personnel over
several wars indicates that they do not want to be
bullies, they do not want to hurt innocent people,
and they want to believe they are engaged in an
honorable war. A credible moral basis for combat
prevents atrocities, enables soldiers to kill when
they must, and it also helps them manage their emo179
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
tions after combat. Such management is essential
to enable them to remain psychologically combatcapable, and to protect them against posttraumatic
stress disorder.
A moral purpose for war is not the same thing as
a “just war” in the sense that just war theorists use
the term. (See Chapter 8, Just War Doctrine and the
International Law of War, for a further discussion
of just war theory.) For a combatant, the language
of treaties is remote. What matters to the soldier is
that the action he is embarked on makes sense and
is not transparently criminal. A commander who
fabricates a “just war” rationale for an action the
real purpose of which is simply advancing national
interests squanders his credibility.
On the other hand, there is much that commanders can do that is honorable to support resistance
to psychological collapse in combat. They can assure that missions are ethically valid and that commanders are committed to the same values as their
subordinates. They can acknowledge and accept
soldiers’ emotions during after-action reviews. And
they can mobilize and validate the actions of chaplains and mental health professionals.
“What’s Right” and Combat Stress Breakdown
Combat stress breakdown is collapse of character in the face of fear, guilt, misery, and betrayal of
“what’s right”—the accepted operational ethics in
the unit. Personnel suffering acute combat stress
breakdown exhibit a variety of symptoms—apathy,
depression, overwhelming anxiety, chronic shivering,
recklessness, paranoia, acting out, and psychosomatic
disorders, to name a few of the most common. These
symptoms not only cause personal distress, they
impair the sufferers’ ability to perform duties and
care for themselves. Evidence from World War II
demonstrated that every person will, at some point,
undergo breakdown in the face of the stresses of
combat. 63(pp15–16)
Untreated, combat stress breakdown becomes
chronic posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Victims of PTSD suffer from a cluster of symptoms that
includes startle disorders, nightmares, and flashbacks. 64(pp412,417–420) They also suffer damage to their
character in the form of inability to trust, love, and
concentrate. The damage to character has the
greater disabling impact and social cost. Recovery
is slow, difficult, dependent on a supportive community, and may never be complete. 1(pp184–195),3
Unit cohesion has been demonstrated to be the
most effective way of strengthening personnel
against combat stress breakdown. 28,65,66 Ethics and
cohesion are interactive and mutually supporting.
Together they help military personnel postpone the
onset of breakdown, lessen its severity, and support
recovery. 1(pp196–204) This chapter has discussed how
ethics support military personnel in combat and the
role of ethics in building cohesion. The most powerful catalyst for breakdown is command betrayal
of “what’s right.” The reason command betrayal has
such a disastrous effect on character is that fighting personnel depend for their sanity on the agreed
definitions of “what’s right,” and they depend for
their survival on the integrity of their commanders. If their leaders lie to them, or send them on
missions that require them to do things that are “not
right,” or abandon them psychologically on the
battlefield, the slender thread of trust that sustains
them is broken. 36 If the primary group bonding is
sufficiently strong, the members of the group may
survive psychologically by validating each other,
but vertical cohesion will be destroyed. The members of the squad or other unit will unite against
higher echelons, and the unit will be lost to command. 28,67 If the primary group is not strongly cohesive, its members will be psychologically adrift,
and damage to character is probable. 1(p198)
Ethical and Psychological Support for Morale
and Character
When the officially stated purpose of a military
intervention is at variance with the observable facts,
commanders are in a quandary. They know their
troops want to be part of a good war, and the wiser
ones know that the troops will not believe a false
rationale. Protection of organizational cohesion and
the troops’ psyches demand that commanders tell
the truth as best they can. The principal cause of
character damage to soldiers was leaders’ betrayal
of their subordinates’ moral assumptions about
fairness. 1(pp9–20,169ff)
In addition to structuring a credible ethical system and communicating honestly with subordinates, there are processes by which commanders can
help their troops manage their moral and emotional
ambivalence about carrying out aversive duties. The
most effective is the after-action review (AAR) that
has become a component of leadership in some services. Similar to a critical incident debriefing, the
AAR is a rank-free, open discussion among all of
the members of small units or command groups
about a training or combat event. Everyone describes what he perceived and did, and what he
perceived others as doing. Together, the members
of the unit learn tactical lessons and refine teamwork.
180
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
When the AAR includes emotions as well as actions it offers the individual an opportunity to have
his feelings validated by his peers and leaders. The
AAR becomes an ethical forum in which guilt, fear,
grief, horror, and barbarous acts can be detoxified
by the approbation of the group, if the group determines that the feelings and actions fall within the
boundaries of “what’s right.” The AAR also serves
as an informal court to curb a member whose actions are deemed out of line, and as a legislature to
revise the definitions of “what’s right” to cover situations not previously considered. These processes
of developing moral values and applying them to
validate or condemn actions may be anathema to
those who are only comfortable with a set of absolute values, but the processes work. They preserve
the psychological fighting integrity of units, they
strengthen the individual’s ability to resist combat
stress disorders, and they stifle tendencies toward
committing criminal acts.
Commanders, Chaplains, and Mental Health
Professionals
Even in units with strong horizontal and vertical cohesion supported by a coherent and credible
body of ethics, crises occur in combat and in training that put the members under severe stress. When
these occur, critical incident debriefings or AARs
are the most effective way of alleviating psychological trauma. 68 The involvement of chaplains and
mental health professionals can support command
in helping soldiers survive crises with their psyches
intact. Constructive collaboration among these
agencies has not been common in the past, but when
it can be achieved each can reinforce the others.
Prior to the Persian Gulf War, chaplains were
accepted by line commanders and their troops. They
were present at brigade and sometimes battalion
level, and most took an active part in the spiritual
and familial lives of service members. Unlike the
chaplains, mental health professionals not only
were not accepted, they were generally feared. Their
role was usually perceived as assessing the mental
states of personnel in processes leading to court
martial or to administrative elimination. To admit
to having psychological problems was to end one’s
career. 61 In professional armed services most of the
members want to stay in, and they do not want
mental health professionals finding out things about
them that could jeopardize their careers.
Before 1990, psychiatrists, psychologists, social
workers, and mental health technicians usually
stayed in hospitals and were seldom known in line
units. In the mid-1980s, under the leadership of
General Maxwell Thurman, the Department of the
Army began a reorganization of medical assets to
make possible the formation of combat stress control teams. 69 During the Persian Gulf War such
teams were hastily organized and deployed to the
theater where they offered their services to forward
units. They received a skeptical reception in most
units, but some managed to establish their credibility. When crises arose, several combat stress control teams were helpful in debriefing emotionally
traumatized personnel and supporting them. 70–72
Mental health personnel learned to ally themselves
with chaplains who were already accepted in most
units. The chaplains helped combat stress control
teams begin the process of winning trust. Mental
health personnel are difficult for some commanders and chaplains to tolerate,61,71(p128) but they all have
a common goal of supporting the psychological
readiness of the troops they serve.
MILITARY CULTURE: A RESPONSIBILITY OF COMMAND
Military culture defines the ways an armed force
does its business in peacetime and in combat, provides the foundation for relations between ranks,
and defines the responsibilities of leaders for the
personal, professional, and familial welfare of their
personnel. The development of horizontal and vertical cohesion depend on shared cultural and moral
perceptions. Ethical components of military culture
are essential to enable fighting personnel to accomplish their missions of killing, to limit their activities to those required to accomplish national objectives, and to help combat personnel survive their
experiences psychologically. Together these processes define the capacity of an armed force to fight,
to cohere, and to recover to fight the next campaign.
It will come as no surprise that the responsibility
for interpreting, adapting, and transmitting military
culture lies with command.
This section is an essay on creating an ethically
supportive military culture. It has three parts. The
first is a discussion of authority and discipline and
how an ethically unsupportive culture undermines
them. The second is a description of cultural processes
by which leaders build support for the command
structure in a post–Cold-War environment. The
third is a prescriptive set of ethical-cultural elements
181
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
for an armed force in the 21st century. Together the
three parts will define some of the essential behavior commanders need to incorporate if they are to
build bonds of trust with their subordinates.
Authority, Discipline, and Maladaptive Cultural
Practices
Many military leaders assume that their position
in the hierarchy gives them authority. But authority, the expectation that a leader’s orders will be
obeyed, is much more complex. To be sure, positional authority can be effective when stakes are
modest and stress is minimal. When things get
tense, people look for someone to show them how
to cope, and if the nominal leader can do it, his subordinates will be quick to ratify his authority. If he
cannot, his followers will withdraw authority from
him and give it to someone who can show them how
to manage their situation. Leaders have real authority only to the extent that their followers are prepared to grant it to them. 73
Subordinates confer authority on superiors
whom they trust and in whose competence they
have confidence. Professional ignorance is the mortal enemy of military authority. When a person in a
position of leadership does not know what to do,
he is embarrassed, and he may often use bluff, lies,
and undue emphasis on matters he does understand
to cover his ignorance. Incompetence has sometimes
become so pervasive that elaborate institutional
practices have evolved to conceal the ignorance of
senior personnel and cloak them with some sort of
mask of authority, irrespective of its substantive
relevance.
For example, many service members have undergone inspections such as the US Army’s annual general inspection. The chief of the inspection team
typically introduced his team with words such as,
“We are here to see if you can accomplish your mission.” The team then proceeded to conduct a minute
inspection of the magazines in the dayroom, unit
punishment records, mess hall accounts, and the
uniformity of displays of individual field equipment that is never taken to the field. 29(p70),74(pp70–78)
Usually the inspectors inspected everything that
had nothing to do with the mission, and nothing
that had anything to do with the mission. The reason was that the inspectors were not technically
qualified to inspect matters pertaining to the mission, so they inspected what they did understand,
and passed judgment on the unit. The concept of
the inspection is devoid of integrity because it required the members of the inspected units to divert a
great deal of time to preparing the eyewash the
inspectors would evaluate instead of preparing to
perform their actual mission. Everyone from the battalion commander on down knew that the annual
general inspection was meaningless. 74(pp70–74) Because
the inspection was fraudulent, but was treated as a
matter of great moment by command, it undermined
confidence in the integrity of command.
Another institutionalized fraud is the unit status report. Its ostensible purpose is to inform senior commanders of the readiness of units so they
can use the unit appropriately and take action to
provide the unit with resources it is lacking. But
when the report was created in the mid-1960s the
military cultural climate was such that most commanders believed that their careers depended on
reporting the highest readiness rating irrespective
of the actual condition of their commands. Commanders felt pressure from all their superiors—who
would look bad if one of their units reported a low
readiness condition. 29(pp59ff),74(pp58ff) So, in the weeks
prior to submission of the reports, middle-rank
commanders assembled their subordinate commanders and had them transfer, on paper, personnel and equipment so that their records would indicate that every unit was at the highest possible
state of readiness. Senior commanders were pleased;
their units looked good, and they did not have to
make any hard choices about allocation of resources
or do any work to strengthen units. Such exercises
in deceit divert time and energy from real missions,
approve unethical conduct, and demonstrate that—
from the perspective of senior commanders—honor
is irrelevant.
It is easier to criticize procedures than it is to identify the reasons why they have become corrupted.
Annual general inspections and unit status reports are
not inherently dishonorable; it is the military culture
and the psychological climate underlying them that
are the problems. The primary reason why honor
can become irrelevant for basically honorable men
is that many service chiefs fear their civilian masters, and they alleviate their own anxiety by inducing insecurity in their subordinates who induce it
in their subordinates, and on down the line.
Building insecurity among subordinates is a system that does not work. It makes it too dangerous
for leaders to empower subordinates, it stifles innovation, and it breeds fear of action. The result is
passive, querulous leaders who believe that to avoid
being fired they must look good and avoid criticism.
When looking good is mandatory, nobody is will182
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
ing to take the risks required to be good. This is a
dangerous atmosphere for institutions in which incompetence can mean death. Leaders in some of the
services, recognizing the importance of building a
sense of security among subordinate leaders, are
struggling to do so. It is a difficult task when insecurity is rampant because of repeated waves of
downsizing.
But it is a task of the greatest importance for the
effectiveness of the armed forces. During the 1950s
and 1960s the author observed a military culture
based on looking good, careerism, and lying breed
a generation of technically incompetent field grade
and general officers. The inability of these men
to assess and develop the proficiency of their units
in combat in Vietnam limited US fighting power
and led to the disintegration of morale and discipline between 1968 and 1972. 18,25,75 There were
incidents of junior enlisted soldiers refusing
missions,18(pp98ff),25(pp45ff) and assassinations of leaders whose incompetence their subordinates believed
threatened their lives. 1,14,18,25,74,76 Soldiers who killed
or tried to kill their superiors, and were caught,
were punished. 14(pp121–122) A military service must
punish subordinates who attack their superiors, but
when assassination attempts become relatively frequent, it is the task of the command structure to
look at itself.
The US Army did look at itself, at the instigation
of Lieutenant General William F. Peers, who described to General William C. Westmoreland, then
Chief of Staff of the Army, the ethical bankruptcy
of the Army culture as revealed by the perceptions
of serving officers. The US Army War College Study
on Military Professionalism,12 discussed earlier, confirmed General Peers’ perceptions, but General
Westmoreland and other senior generals refused to
accept the report or act on its findings. 14(pp107–113) The
senior leaders abandoned their junior leaders to a
militarily maladaptive, ethically corrupt, and psychologically destructive culture. Senior commanders have the legal standing and the coercive capabilities to impose standards of ethical behavior, such
as those stated in the Code of Conduct or the lists of
official values of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, on
their subordinates. (See Chapter 5, The Profession
of Arms and the Officer Corps, for a discussion of
the official values of the services, including the Code
of Conduct.) But when they presume to impose arbitrary standards in a context of perpetuating a corrupt military culture they lose their moral authority, and few people will take the standards they promulgate seriously and incorporate them into their
behavior. 47,48
Military traditionalists insist on unquestioning
obedience. For them, punishment of misconduct is
the only way to develop an orderly and efficient
unit. If “good” behavior is rewarded and “bad”
behavior is punished, then everyone will hew narrowly to accepted patterns of conduct. Communications with subordinates, respect for them and
their views, and such emotional issues as ownership of the mission are not considered to be part of
the equation. The evidence from studies conducted
by the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research during the 1980s indicates that authoritarianism is not
ethical because it does not work. It does not work
because it creates an adversarial relationship between superiors and subordinates, alienates junior
personnel, and kills vertical cohesion. Members of
units led by compassionate, competent, candid officers and noncommissioned officers (NCOs) are not
only more enthusiastic and interested in their military activities, but better disciplined and more proficient as individuals and as team members. Such leadership behavior is ethically valid because it meets the
psychological needs of individuals as well as institutional needs for order and operational effectiveness.
Building Support for Discipline and the Command Structure
When national objectives, the ethical standards
promulgated by command, the conduct of leaders,
and soldiers’ sense of “what’s right” are in synchrony, soldiers will endow command with full
authority and thus vertical cohesion will be strong.
One need only look at the ineffectiveness of most
units of the Republic of Vietnam’s Army between
1965 and 1972 to see how loyalty evaporates and
combat effectiveness disappears when these moral
factors are not in synchrony. 77
In considering how to strengthen respect for discipline and the command structure it will be useful
to consider four aspects of military culture: (1) the
nature of discipline, (2) the process of creating an
ethical framework, (3) intrainstitutional communications, and (4) managing ethical ambiguity.
The Nature of Discipline
Discipline is a complex operational and ethical
concept. At its core it refers to the disposition of
troops to behave properly. In the US armed services
the ideal of discipline is achieved when junior personnel intelligently, willingly, cheerfully, and correctly accomplish tasks and missions in the absence
of orders or supervision.
183
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
This is the view of discipline that produced the
tank crews of the Persian Gulf War, men whose internal drive for proficiency and sense of responsibility to their comrades enabled them to take advantage of the technological superiority of their
equipment to destroy several Iraqi tanks before
most of their adversaries could get a round off
against them. 39(pp261–272) It is the kind of discipline
that steadied soldiers in Panama conducting “Sand
Flea” operations against the Panamanian Defense
Force (PDF). These operations, designed to harass
and provoke Panamanian soldiers prior to hostilities, pitted small patrols led by sergeants against
heavily armed and nervous Panamanians. The
Americans kept their composure and prevailed;
their discipline was supported by their professional
confidence, trust in their leaders, and conviction
that they were doing “what was right.”38,61
In contrast to the idealized notion of discipline,
there has been a tendency in many armies to consider that disciplined conduct is a duty owed by
subordinates to their superiors, a duty the subordinates fail to fulfill at their peril. In this author’s
opinion, this tendency has dominated the US armed
forces for most of their history. It had some measure of validity during periods of emergency mobilization when time was short, the number of professional soldiers small, and the bulk of conscripted
service members would return to the civil sector
when the war was over. But even then abandoning
the ideal of discipline was a suboptimal approach.
Respect for command and authority is not to be
assumed in a professional armed force. To be sure,
habits of trust in leaders and of teamwork are important parts of the structure of discipline in such a
force. But these habits emerge as the consequence
of prolonged experience between leaders who respect their subordinates and recognize their dependency on them, and followers who respect their
superiors for their competence and their demonstrated interest in their troops’ welfare. It is not
habits of obedience or submission to rituals of subordination that create combat-worthy discipline. It
is the interdependence and trust developed as subordinates experience the integrity, competence, and
concern of their superiors. 73(p45)
This said, one cannot neglect the fact that some
service members violate regulations and their comrades’ views of “what’s right.” Antisocial acts, dishonesty, and behavior that undoes work done by
good soldiers all diminish trust and cohesion. Commanders have an ethical and pragmatic obligation
to their good subordinates to punish or get rid of
the bad ones.
Creating an Ethical Framework
One of the ways in which leaders earn respect
and authority is by structuring an ethical framework in their units that fits the realities of the situation and is psychologically supportive. Structuring ethics requires insight, courage, and sensitivity
to the concerns of subordinates. For an ethical program to be effective, it must make sense in the eyes
of subordinates. They are more likely to embrace it
in a climate of mutual trust and confidence than if
they are under the threat of court-martial. And they
will only respect the command structure when its
values are consonant with observable reality.
Commanders can strengthen their own authority and the bonds of vertical cohesion by building
on shared moral values in deriving ethical precepts.
While it is not realistic to expect commanders to
solicit overtly their subordinates’ opinions about
“what’s right,” they can discern their subordinates’
values through informal discussions with junior
enlisted personnel and first-line supervisors. This
is not as difficult as it may appear; effective commanders at all echelons routinely spend a substantial portion of their time listening to their subordinates. Most of the subordinates’ values will be
consonant with those required by the military
and political situation. When they are not, the
commander’s task is to provide training and education. The success of any effort to change soldiers’
attitudes is a function of the trust the soldiers have
in the leaders and the US Army. Commanders who
demonstrate by their policies and behavior that they
respect their subordinates’ ethical perceptions, and
that they are competent, trustworthy, and committed to supporting subordinate personnel, have substantial ability to shape the moral attitudes of their
personnel.
It is important that commanders share their subordinates’ perceptions of the situation in which they
are operating. Ethical tenets that enjoin behavior
that is not realistically possible under a particular
set of circumstances provide no support, demonstrate that command is not in touch with reality, and
increase the individual soldier’s sense of alienation
and despair. 15(pp161,180,209ff) When soldiers lose faith in
command, their participation in the mission drops
and their propensity for the full range of acting
out—alcohol, drugs, desertion—grows.
Normally the components of such an ethical
framework will be values readily acceptable to the
members of the unit. But often the circumstances
of a conflict dictate special ethics. During the invasion of Panama in 1989 the objective of avoiding
184
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
casualties among Panamanian civilian and military
personnel took precedence over force protection, one
of the four primary elements of combat power. 78 The
rules of engagement for that particular military action specified that no American could fire unless
he was fired upon and could positively identify the
source of the fire. Commanders required their personnel to concede the first shot to the enemy. 38,61
These rules imposed dramatically increased danger on the Americans, and heavy responsibility on
the leaders who had to tell their men to follow them.
The soldiers did follow the rules, and took pride in
doing so. Most of them trusted their leaders. Those
leaders had candidly explained the reasons for the
restrictive rules of engagement, and the soldiers had
confidence in their ability to prevail even though
they had to let the other side get the drop on them.
Intrainstitutional Communication
Linking an ethical structure with perceived reality is a matter of honesty and of communication.
Keeping subordinates informed has been a tenet of
US military leadership for decades, but one not often implemented. There are always pretexts for
withholding or distorting information, such as:
knowledge of the situation would confuse or
frighten the troops; the troops only have to obey,
not think; or the troops are too ignorant to understand
the big picture. These pretexts have more often than
not covered commanders’ ignorance, mistakes, or
inability to address effectively the situations before
them. Exhibit 6-13 summarizes three historical examples of noncommunication by commanders that
led to military catastrophe.
Honest, frank communication by commanders
not only conveys information to the troops, it also
conveys the commander’s respect and concern for
them, and lets them know he is aware of the same
reality they are. Subordinates are more likely to
embrace ethical tenets from commanders when they
are confident that their chiefs understand the situations they face. Furthermore, they are much more
likely to win.
Command in Ethically Ambiguous Situations
The military interventions that have followed the
end of the Cold War have often been characterized
by imprecise definitions of military missions that
leave military personnel facing situations that are
morally ambiguous. Humanitarian objectives, political agendas, international intrigue, criminal activity, and military operations are commingled in
situations that may place military personnel in danger, or at least in discomfort. Moral ambiguity puts
stress on military personnel and on the vertical cohesion that links the capabilities of the unit with
national purposes. Sometimes the vertical cohesion
developed through the competence and integrity of
leaders during peacetime is strong enough to see a
unit through a period of uncertain, changing, and
ethically confusing missions. But if command fails
to adhere to a realistic and coherent ethical system,
cohesion is strained and may even collapse—as it
did in some units in Vietnam. It is worthwhile to
review the military culture of the early years of the
post–Cold-War era from the perspective of command integrity.
In Panama in 1989 and 1990, soldiers and marines were called upon during Operation Just Cause
to defeat and subjugate the Panamanian Defense
Force. They did that within a short period of time,
and the mission shifted to constabulary work. They
did that, and the mission shifted to nation building. They accomplished that mission also, even
training former PDF soldiers to be a national police
force. The command structure had communicated
the complex objectives of the invasion of Panama
clearly and comprehensively. Junior personnel understood that the purpose of the military operation
was to put an end to the Noriega regime, then to
help the Panamanians set up a stable democratic
government. Vertical cohesion held units together
as they worked successfully to master constantly
changing missions. But in the months following the
operation many of the American soldiers and marines realized that the United States had pulled out
and let the Panamanians fall into economic collapse
and chaos. They expressed dismay at the lack of moral
purpose in the US government, and vertical cohesion
became frayed. 4,61 General Thurman, who was Commander-in-Chief, US Southern Command, before,
during, and after the invasion, shared his subordinates’ dismay. He felt that he had failed by not putting together a comprehensive, long-term development plan. However, he found no interest among
other branches of government for such a plan. 4
The stated purpose of the United Nations Operation Restore Hope, which occurred between 1992
and 1994, was to avert starvation in Somalia. American forces organized around the 10th Mountain Division accomplished that purpose, and most of the
combat forces returned home. In October 1993, 4,000
United Nations personnel remained, of whom about
600 were combat troops. At this time the President
of the United States directed the commander of the
US contingent to seize Mohammed Farah Aidid, the
185
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
EXHIBIT 6-13
POOR INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS RESULTING IN MILITARY FAILURE
The following three examples demonstrate the critical importance of internal communications (ie, between
component units) in a theater of operations.
Example 1: In 1905 Admiral Zinovi Rozhdestvenski led the Russian Baltic Squadron, a force of eight battleships, six armored cruisers, and 39 supporting vessels, halfway around the world to fight the Japanese fleet in
the Tsushima Straits between Japan and Korea during the Russo–Japanese War. He did not share his battle
plans with his subordinate commanders. As the squadron went into action his divisions had no idea what the
others would do and what their own roles in the battle should be. The Japanese fleet, though inferior in gun
power and numbers of battleships (four battleships and eight armored cruisers), sank, captured, or forced into
internment 50 of the 53 Russian ships without losing any of its own. 1–3 Admiral Rozhdestvenski may have felt
that he did not know how to face the Japanese fleet, or he may have been paralyzed with fear. His failure to
communicate and act in concert led to a decisive defeat for the Russian Navy.
Example 2: Lieutenant-General Arthur Percival was commander-in-chief of British air, ground, and sea forces
in Malaya and Singapore in 1942. The Japanese assaulted Malaya from the sea, fought their way down the
peninsula and attacked Singapore from the landward side, thereby avoiding much of the British seacoast
artillery. General Percival refused, as a matter of policy, to communicate information about the Japanese invasion to the civilian officials and population in Singapore. He refused to build defensive positions because “it
would alarm the inhabitants.” He declined to mobilize civilian labor resources on the island because he feared
civil unrest. The Japanese with 60,000 soldiers defeated the British, who had 80,000 men plus the entire Malay
population, good defensive ground, and powerful artillery. 4 General Percival clearly feared the native population, kept them uninformed, and even forbade defensive measures that would reveal the gravity of the situation. The Japanese had a coherent battle plan while the British refused to inform, mobilize, and coordinate
their superior resources.
Example 3: In 1935 General Douglas MacArthur accepted responsibility for training and organizing the Philippine Army. The Philippine–American war plan envisaged a surprise Japanese attack by 100,000 men. The
Philippine–American forces were to withdraw into the Bataan Peninsula and hold out for 6 months until reinforced. Events developed exactly as foreseen except that the Japanese attacked with only 43,000 men. The
Philippine–American forces conducted a 30-day delaying action to enable MacArthur to build up supplies in
the Bataan Peninsula and build fortifications. When the field commanders got to Bataan, they found that
MacArthur had failed to tell them that he had made no provision to feed their troops. After 3 months of
starvation the 76,000-man Philippine–American forces surrendered to a force half their strength. General
MacArthur’s failure to communicate concealed his mistake in not moving supplies to Bataan, his ignorance of
the relative efficiency of the forces engaged, and his failure to dispose his own forces effectively. Though
voluble about the hardships he faced, he was silent about his own incompetence. 5,6 (The fate of these captives
was detailed in Exhibit 6-9.)
Sources: (1) Hough RA. The Fleet That Had to Die. New York: Viking; 1958. (2) Brassey TA. The Naval Annual. Portsmouth,
UK: J. Griffin & Co.; 1905. (3) Jane FT. Fighting Ships. London, UK: Sampson Low Marston; 1906. (4) McIntyre WD. The Rise
and Fall of the Singapore Naval Base, 1919–1942. Hamden, Conn: The Shoestring Press/Archon Books; 1979. (5) Whitman JW.
Bataan: Our Last Ditch. New York: Hippocrene; 1990. (6) Perret G. There’s a War to be Won: The United States Army in World
War II. New York: Random House; 1991: 47–58.
most powerful warlord in Somalia.
A force of 106 Rangers and Special Operations
men raided Aidid’s headquarters in a section of
Mogadishu where he had once been mayor. The Secretary of Defense had denied the assault force the armored vehicles it needed, the US Air Force crew assigned to man a gunship was on leave in Italy, there
was no artillery support, and no contingency plan
in the event they got into trouble. (The reasons for
these failures remain classified.) Several thousand
Somalis trapped the raiding party, shot down three
of the helicopters that brought them in, and destroyed the raiders’ ground vehicles. The US command took 11 hours to organize a relief force and
send it the 3 miles from the US base to the raiders’
defensive position. By the time the American troops
were extricated, the assault force and the relief force
had lost 18 dead and 73 wounded. 74(pp156–178),79
186
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Though the troops behaved with courage and
honor, there were dishonorable failures by senior
civilian and military leaders: the President for
changing the mission from humanitarian relief to
combat after the combat forces had been withdrawn; and the Secretary of Defense for: (a) committing troops to heavy urban combat without armored vehicles, fire support, and numbers adequate
for the mission; (b) failing to make contingency
plans; and (c) refusing to cooperate across service
and branch boundaries. No one was held accountable. The theater commander was promoted to lieutenant general, the task force commander was appointed to head the US Army Special Warfare
School, and the White House and Department of
Defense put a special handling classification on
everything about the operation to protect it from
inquiries under the Freedom of Information Act. 74
The Senate conducted an investigation, but the
White House blocked the release of the report. 74
There was no coherent ethical system linking the
President, the military chain of command, and the
troops who conducted the mission. 74(pp178–190)
The soldiers on duty in Somalia had faced many
moral dilemmas. They were tasked with carrying
out a humanitarian mission in the face of heavily
armed autonomous groups. Neither the National
Command Authority nor local commanders could
decide whether to destroy the combat capability of
the bandits or to appease them. They decided to attack the bandits a little and to placate them a little—
which left them armed and angry. Junior soldiers on
the ground had to make a number of hard moral
decisions in the face of the unresolved moral dilemmas. 80 They did an outstanding job, but many were
disillusioned with the incompetent commanders and
government that sent them in harm’s way and then
evaded responsibility for the outcome. 74(pp162,180–181)
From 1992 to 1993 the US Army deployed a mobile
army surgical hospital (MASH) to Zagreb, Croatia.
Though only 20% of the resources of the hospital were
used to treat United Nations troops, the complex and
internally divided command structure refused to allow the medical staff to treat sick and injured
Croatians. The official reason was that the hospital
had to maintain a neutral position. 51(pp82–83) The hospital staff experienced danger, filth, and hunger, but they
felt that they were not doing nearly as much as they
could. They were morally outraged to see Croatians
suffering while they did nothing. Their perceptions
were that the multiple and overlapping headquarters
that controlled the activities of the hospital staff were
more concerned with how they appeared to the media, to each other, and to their superiors than with
providing medical service to suffering people. Vertical cohesion plummeted because the command structure did not demonstrate integrity. 51(pp80–84)
In morally chaotic situations, military personnel
depend on integrity in the chain of command for
psychological sustenance. Honor requires commanders to provide ethically credible missions,
competent leadership, adequate resources, and
compassionate treatment for foreign military and
civilian personnel. Moral failure at the top can vitiate efforts by intermediate and junior leaders to
establish ethical coherency in their units.
Elements of an Ethically Supportive Military Culture
An ethically supportive military culture is one in
which in the daily course of events soldiers perceive
that the institution, as represented by its policies and
the behavior of its officials, is committed to their
welfare and success. Such a culture fosters the development of trust. I will discuss four aspects of an ethically supportive military culture that are usually neglected: (1) managing subordinates’ time and energy,
(2) building a sense of security for subordinate leaders, (3) supporting leaders’ self-maintenance, (4) and
guiding sexual behavior in gender-integrated units.
Managing Subordinates’ Time and Energy
Troops understand that their leaders have missions to accomplish, and that the leaders have to
balance the effort they ask of their troops against
the troops’ personal needs—sleep, time with families, and a predictable schedule of events. Many
leaders who grew up in the traditions of World War
II put any mission, no matter how trivial, ahead of
any needs of their subordinates, no matter how significant. While a new respect for junior personnel
is emerging, there are still tendencies at most echelons toward habitual demand overload. 30 Leaders
who have the ethical stamina and professional judgment to organize work and assign priorities so that
the troops get some respite, earn their subordinates’
trust. As will become apparent, when troops see that
a leader does not have the moral courage to resist
the pressure to assign every task a number one priority, they will not trust him in combat.
In the US armed forces since 1945, the plethora
of officers and dearth of command positions has led
to a burgeoning of staffs with insatiable appetites
for information and for projects through which the
staff officers can win distinction. 74(pp130ff,299ff) The task
of providing the information and executing the
projects falls on the lowest echelons. 25(pp12,64,136) “Do
187
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
EXHIBIT 6-14
WEAK AND INSECURE COMMANDERS
World War II was generally acclaimed as a “good” war, with evil adversaries (Hitler, Tojo, and Mussolini) and
clear-cut objectives (survival of the United States and the defeat of evil on a global scale). There has been a
reluctance to criticize real commanders (in sufficient detail to permit behavioral analysis) who were weak and
insecure. However, two superb novels, The Caine Mutiny1 and Mister Roberts,2 describe the destructive potential of weak and insecure fictitious commanders in positions of command. Each portrays an officer in command of a naval vessel who is so lacking in competence, confidence, and psychological integrity that he perceives his subordinates as adversaries. To alleviate their own insecurity, Captain Queeg and Captain Morton
bullied, harassed, and threatened their junior leaders and their crews. To preserve their own integrity, junior
officers and crewmen united to thwart their commanders but in ways that did not totally compromise the
mission capabilities of their ships. But the commitment of the crews was less than wholehearted, and in one
case led to the executive officer relieving his captain.
Sources: (1) Wouk H. The Caine Mutiny. New York: Dell; 1951. (2) Heggen T. Mister Roberts. New York: Houghton Mifflin; 1946.
more with less” became the slogan of the 1990s. It
is the kind of slogan that increases alienation and
weakens people’s confidence that they will not be
left to face a superior’s displeasure or be abandoned
on the battlefield. It indicates that senior commanders lack the courage to say “no,” are afraid to stand
up for their subordinates, and are unwilling to accept responsibility for assigning priorities.
The reason that management of time is an important capital issue to military culture is that no
commander can take charge of it in isolation—he
needs the support of the military institution as a
whole. A company commander or the skipper of a
small warship may do his best to become a competent practitioner of his profession, assign priorities,
and respect the personal needs of his subordinates.
But if he is constantly inundated with requirements
for reports, VIP demonstrations, community activities, fatigue details, and other distracters, his efforts
to assign priority to the work most relevant to his
unit’s mission will lead to some senior commanders or staff officers being dissatisfied, and to his
being relieved. If he is to progress in his career, he
must often disregard his subordinates’ welfare and
try to fulfill every requirement. The ethical issue,
then, is that for a commander to behave in an honorable manner balancing missions and his troops’
welfare, he needs an honorable chain of command
above him blocking extraneous requirements before
they reach him.
The respect for subordinates that began to emerge
in the Army and Marine Corps in the 1980s and 1990s
has had some effect in mitigating demand overload,
but continuing reductions in strength without a concomitant reduction of missions tends to perpetuate
it. Thus, smaller forces put heavier demands on senior leaders to stand up for the service members they
command and to choose the harder right of refusing
inappropriate missions. In this author’s opinion, unless senior commanders are prepared to resign when
the government imposes requirements that are out of
line with capabilities and resources, there can be no
solid ethical foundation in the armed services. Their
subordinates will not be able to believe in them, and
will feel they are being sacrificed to their chiefs’
cowardliness and ambition.
Building a Sense of Security for Subordinate Leaders
Many American commanders have been quick to
threaten their subordinate leaders, especially in
combat. A typical peacetime threat is: “You get a
fence built around your orderly room, I don’t care
how, or it will reflect on your efficiency report.”
Wartime threats take the form of, “Accomplish this
mission or don’t come back alive.”81–83 This sort
of behavior during World War II was characterized
as strong, even heroic, leadership. 81,82,84,85 In fact it
was the opposite. Weak and insecure commanders
routinely used threats81(p211) (for examples, see Exhibit 6-14), and ordinary commanders resorted to
threats when they were uncertain about what to
do. 5(pp230ff,295ff,784ff) Commanders who have strong
characters do not use threats; when the situation is
desperate, they say so and ask their troops to do
their best.
188
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Many citizens who served as enlisted soldiers in
World War II resented officers’ bullying, harassing,
or self-serving behavior. When the war was over, these
citizen-soldiers spoke out. Secretary of War Robert
Patterson ordered an investigation of their complaints
by a special board, which issued the Doolittle Report (Exhibit 6-15), addressing these issues.
The principal effect of the Doolittle Report was
psychological, in large part because the substantive
recommendations concerning respect for subordinates and support for leaders were ignored. Career
officers and NCOs resented even the superficial
reforms, and felt betrayed by the replacement in
1951 of the Articles of War with the Uniform Code
of Military Justice (UCMJ). For instance, subtle differences in language concerning nonjudicial punishment for minor offenses were widely perceived
as disempowering the company commander and his
NCOs. 5(p372),86 The author heard numerous junior
leaders in the US Army of 1948 to 1955 complain
bitterly of how the senior leadership had left them
helpless to coerce their troops, when actually the
changes were superficial. Their attitudes reflected
EXHIBIT 6-15
THE DOOLITTLE COMMISSION REPORT
As a reserve officer, Brigadier General James H. Doolittle was a good choice to look into the postwar criticism
of the officer corps, as his reserve status gave him distance and insulation from the politics of power. He had
joined the US Army Air Service as a lieutenant in 1920. During the 1920s and 1930s he was an aviator of
renown, having set several aviation records, earned a doctorate of science from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, and won the Schneider, Bendix, and Thompson aviation trophies.
Recalled to active duty in 1940, then-Lieutenant Colonel Doolittle organized and led the first air attack on
Japan in April 1942, just 4 months after the Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. He was awarded the
Medal of Honor and promoted to brigadier general. He commanded the 12th Air Force in the US assault landings in North Africa in November 1942. In 1943 he commanded the Northwest Africa Strategic Air Force for
the invasions of Sicily and Italy. In 1944 and 1945 he commanded the 8th Air Force conducting the daylight
bombing attack on Germany. In short, he had over 15 years of military experience and was a commanding
presence among aviation engineers and policy makers. He knew the military and yet was beyond it by virtue
of his reserve status.
The complaints he was to investigate included arrogance and self-indulgence on the part of officers, indifference to and mistreatment of enlisted personnel, the existence of a caste system that gave privileges to officers
but not to enlisted personnel, and unnecessary regimentation. His commission found the complaints for the
most part to be well-founded, but applicable to only a few officers. It recommended significant reforms in the
selection and training of officers and in officer–enlisted relationships. The Army ignored these recommendations but did make cosmetic changes such as eliminating officers’ sabers and prescribing common uniforms
for officers and enlisted personnel.
Source: US War Department. The Report of the Secretary of War’s Board on Officer–Enlisted Man Relations. Washington, DC: The
Infantry Journal Press; 1946.
the authoritarianism that permeated the military
culture during World War II; earning security
through subordinates’ trust was often not an option leaders considered.
The tradition of threatening subordinates persisted for four decades after World War II because
officers were used to it, and because many of them
were insecure. Their insecurity derived from a number of factors. One was that more than 80% of the
officers in the postwar US Army had not been officers before the war,87 and it is reasonable to infer
that some were uncertain about their ability to function in the role. Another was rapid technological
change that some officers feared would outstrip
their frames of reference. A third was a series of
force reductions that compromised expectations
about job security. The consequence was that from
1945 until the late 1970s many units had commanders who compensated for their insecurities by inducing anxiety in their subordinates. 12,74 Demand
overload was routine, fear was the predominant
emotion,74 officers dodged responsibility, and lying
was obligatory. 12 This authoritarian command climate
189
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
was common in units that suffered moral collapse
in Vietnam between 1969 and 1972. 18,25,75 Vietnam
was a case study of how authoritarianism, reassuring though it may be to its practitioners in the short
run, does not work.
The opposite of authoritarianism and rule by fear
is a mix of trust, respect, and empowerment of subordinate leaders. The author has interviewed officers in the US Army, US Navy, and US Marine Corps
who have embraced this kind of leadership behavior. They report that it enormously enhances the
efficiency and morale of the unit and the gratifications of command. Usually subordinates respond
to this kind of leadership by committing all of their
intellectual as well as physical resources to the mission. But it is a risky business. A leader gives up some
of his power to intimidate his subordinates when he
trusts and empowers them. He is still responsible
for mistakes they make, and they are in a position
to destroy his career if they do not trust him.
Leaders are most likely to try empowering leadership when they are certain that their superiors are
on their side and are committed to helping them
succeed. A confident and secure junior leader is not
complacent, but he is psychologically able to afford
to tell the truth, assign priorities, make tactical experiments, let subordinates try their wings, and
accept responsibility. Though the official line is that
every officer should behave thus, in reality only
leaders who trust their superiors to take care of
them will do it. It takes a psychologically secure
commander to create a climate in which ethically
effective leadership can flourish. One authoritarian
anywhere in the chain of command introduces insecurity, dishonesty, and flight from responsibility
in the echelons below him.
Supporting Leader Self-Maintenance
One facet of the security commanders can provide for their subordinate leaders is moral support
for their taking care of themselves. One of the
changes in the culture of the US Army that took hold
as a result of the Doolittle Report was renewed
emphasis on the duty of a leader to take care of his
troops before himself. Unfortunately, the “can do”
mentality, combined with chronic demand overload
and the military cultural conviction that anything
worth doing is worth overdoing, resulted in selfdenial becoming commonplace among leaders.
Leaders’ health and welfare lost all ethical standing in military culture. Leaders would see that their
troops got enough sleep, but not themselves; when
the troops had a training holiday, the leaders would
work. To be sure, a corrective to their previous selfishness was needed, but this overreaction compromised leaders’ physical and mental health and imperiled the troops the leaders were supposed to be
caring for.
Studies by the Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research in the 1980s and early 1990s have demonstrated decrements in cognitive functioning associated with sleep deprivation. Particularly severe are
losses in judgment and the ability to sustain cohesion—the characteristics most important for commanders, especially during combat. 88–91 Even during peacetime maneuvers in the 1980s and 1990s,
“real men” never went to bed, and became almost
nonfunctional. 74(p30) It did not matter, because it was
peacetime, and the leaders proved their points
about their masculinity. Though some units developed sleep plans to assure that key personnel got
at least 6 to 7 hours sleep during every 24-hour period, in many units the peacetime habits persisted
into the Persian Gulf War, with potentially lethal
effects. Those effects remained mostly potential
because the ground war lasted only 4 days, but by
the end many leaders were so sleep deprived that
they were almost comatose. 62 The ability to go without sleep has been a criterion of manliness for more
than 2,000 years. 92,93 But as the tempo of warfare has
increased, sleep deprivation has led to military disasters, as shown in Exhibit 6-16.
Self-maintenance for leaders is an essential part
of military ethics. It is a delicate part, because it
requires a balance between the self-indulgence of
rear echelon officers in the 1940s that the Doolittle
Report criticized and the self-abnegation of combat leaders of the 1980s and 1990s. A leader’s subordinates are usually ready to accept his need to
maintain himself so his faculties will be in working
order. It is up to the leader’s commander to convince him that he supports his subordinate taking
care of himself. A commander who makes his subordinate leaders afraid to be found asleep will soon
be the cause of troops dying because his junior leaders’ judgment failed.
Guiding Sexual Behavior in Gender-Integrated Units
In almost every culture men have developed
elaborate systems to exclude women from military
activities. 94(pp51–54) These systems include chivalry,
Muslim subjugation of women under religious law,
18th and 19th century Anglo-Saxon subjugation of
women under civil law, and, in the past, the US
190
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
Army’s tradition of keeping female soldiers from
combat roles. Though the ostensible moral purpose
of these systems is to protect women from the horrors of combat (to include the risk of capture and
rape), the apparent psychological purpose has been
the protection of men’s sense of masculinity. 94(pp55–56)
The “chief defining role for men in society has become that of warrior. Masculinity is, in fact, ephemeral, fragile, and dependent on women not being
the same.”94(p56)
The reality of military recruiting in the post–
Cold-War era has been a dwindling number of
people in the United States in the 18- to 21-year-old
cohorts with the requisite aptitudes willing to serve
in technologically complex armed forces. 95 To meet
their recruiting goals, the services have needed
women,96 and the ethics of military culture has had
to accommodate this change. Ethical tenets, even
those that serve powerful psychological purposes,
lose standing when they are too widely divorced
from necessity.
The progressively expanding role of women in
the armed forces has brought psychological distress
to many male military personnel. After at least 4,000
years of male domination of armed combat, a single
generation of men has had to bear the psychological weight of an ethical shift that deprives them of
“a crucial identity which is uniquely theirs, a role
which has been as male-defining as child-bearing
has been female-defining.”94(p56) The task of ameliorating their distress while encouraging female soldiers and preserving cohesion falls to the leaders
of gender-integrated units. The most promising
ways to support gender integration are those that
EXHIBIT 6-16
SLEEP DEPRIVATION AND COMMAND DECISIONS
The classic example of the impact of sleep deprivation is the Battle of Savo Island in August 1942. Five American and Australian cruisers and six destroyers, all equipped with radar, were guarding the approaches to the
landing beaches on Guadalcanal. A Japanese force of approximately equal strength, but without radar, attacked at night and sank four cruisers while suffering negligible damage. The American crews, particularly
the officers, had been at battle stations for several days and nights when it was not necessary, and were totally
exhausted. 1 The extent of their incapacitation is evident in the behavior of the captain of one Allied cruiser
who came groggily to the bridge to order his ship to cease firing, believing it was firing on friendly ships. His
gunnery officer could not convince him that the ships were Japanese, but the captain finally did order firing
resumed, saying, “Our ships or not, we’ve got to stop them.”2
Sources: (1) Loxton B. The Shame of Savo: Anatomy of a Naval Disaster. Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press; 1994. (2) Lewis
W. The Battles of Savo Island, 9 August 1942 and the Eastern Solomons, 23–25 August 1942. Washington, DC: Naval Historical
Center, Department of the Navy; 1994.
support racial integration—mutual respect, trust,
and leadership behavior that focuses on military
competence and the combat mission. This approach
is ethically valid not because it is in any abstract or
political sense “good,” but because it meets the
needs of personal, institutional, and operational
constituencies—it works.
There are, however, new ethical, behavioral, and
psychological problems in gender-integrated units
that differ from those encountered in racial integration. Among these are sexual abuse, adultery, and
homosexuality. All of these are punishable under the
UCMJ or sanctionable under administrative regulations, but the application of both the Code and the
regulations has been uneven and controversial.
Sexual Abuse. Sexual abuse in a military setting
refers primarily to superiors using their broad influence over their subordinates’ lives to force them
to engage in sexual activities. Sexual abuse can occur
between peers, but usually there is a power differential between the abuser and the victim. This behavior is the antithesis of honor and is at variance with
most military personnel’s view of “what’s right.”
From a practical point of view it is much worse. It
is manifestly disrespectful of subordinates whether
they are the direct target of abuse or not. It creates
a climate of fear and mistrust in the abuser’s unit,
and it makes the abuser someone who is detested
rather than respected. These factors destroy vertical cohesion within the abuser’s unit and also compromise the integrity of senior command for allowing such a person to hold a position of trust and
authority. Rigorous proscription of sexual abuse is
an essential component of military culture. It meets
191
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
the psychological needs of most male and female personnel as well as institutional needs for order.
Why do abusers engage in behavior that damages their units, demonstrates their untrustworthiness, and often leads to the destruction of their own
lives and those of their families? Rosen et al, in a
recent study of sexual abuse in the US Army, found
that sexual harassment in US Army units is associated with weak peer bonding, poor vertical cohesion, heavy time pressure, low combat readiness,
and substandard mission capability. 97,98 As the problems become more severe, the incidence of harassment tends to increase. These findings translate, in
the cultural context used in this discussion, into lack
of trust in comrades and leaders, poor command
management of time and priorities, and lack of focus on mission-related activities. In a climate of job
insecurity, rapid technological and procedural
change, and seemingly habitual demand overload,
some personnel will lapse into despair.
The solution is strengthened social supports,
empowering leadership, and sensitivity of leaders
to their subordinates’ as well as the US Army’s sense
of “what’s right.” In the units in which sexual abuse
was found to be most likely, personnel received not
support, but injunctions not to abuse women. They
were told they had to be respectful of the very
people whom they perceived as being among the
causes of their distress. 97,98 Some leaders, usually
psychologically marginal, will succumb under such
circumstances and sexually abuse subordinates.
They are usually punished. But punishment, while
it removes the people from the institution who were
nominally the problem, does not solve the underlying systemic problem. The security and confidence senior personnel need if they are to respect,
trust, and work productively with persons of the
opposite sex must come from supportive leadership, not from stern admonitions.
Adultery. While few civilian jurisdictions consider adultery a crime, there are circumstances
when adultery between service members, or between a service member and the spouse of another
service member, could compromise good order and
discipline. The most obvious example is a romantic
relationship between a leader and a subordinate. The
leader’s subordinates almost always learn about
such affairs, and even if the leader did not treat his
lover with special consideration, the leader’s trustworthiness is compromised.
When the lovers are one service member and the
spouse of another of equal rank, the results can be
bitterness and possible violence. When a service
member has an affair with the spouse of a member
of higher or lower rank, the possibilities for abuse
of power, favoritism, and blackmail are limitless.
Proscription of such relationships is appropriate
because it works to protect junior personnel.
Homosexuality. Homosexuality has been a part
of human behavior at least since the beginning of
recorded history, and attitudes toward it have varied. In the US armed forces since the end of World
War II a triad of medical,99 punitive,100 and administrative regulations101,102 has excluded, eliminated,
or punished homosexuals. However, silent, nonpracticing (or discrete) homosexuals served enlistments and even careers in the services. Military
leaders defend exclusionary policies by asserting
that homosexuals in the military make heterosexual
men uncomfortable and fearful of being raped, act
as catalysts for violence by drawing physical attacks
on themselves, and impair unit cohesion. The US
Code governing military policy states that the
“presence in the armed forces of persons who demonstrate a propensity or intent to engage in homosexual acts would create an unacceptable risk to the
high standards of morale, good order and discipline, and unit cohesion that are the essence of military capability.”103
As noted earlier, cohesion is a process of affective bonding among the members of small primary
groups, and across echelons between leaders and
subordinates. Senior officers have had the courage
to use, accurately, terms such as love and affection
to describe the feelings service members in cohesive units have for one another. It is not sexual love,
but fraternal love. Bonding is based on trust and
respect earned during prolonged shared experiences characterized by challenge, stress, and group
achievement. Affection of this kind among members of military units is ethically valid because it
works; it strengthens each individual’s ability to
persevere in the face of adversity and to resist combat stress breakdown. But does the presence of homosexuals in military units adversely affect unit
cohesion?
The evidence available to date is equivocal. 97,104–107
It suggests that fraternal bonding can occur in units
composed of mixed sexes and mixed sexual orientations. It also indicates that such units can be
fraught with mistrust, cliques, and hostility. The
mediating factors may not be the sexual orientations
of the members but the ethical climate and the quality of leadership in the unit. While the nature of the
ethics and leadership most likely to foster bonding
are well known, the degree to which they can over192
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
come centrifugal forces generated by challenges to
group members’ preexisting belief systems and attitudes toward homosexuality are unknown. Until more
complete information is available, it is the author’s
opinion that no definitive ethical statement should be
made about homosexuality in the armed forces.
CONCLUSION
The armed forces are in a rough business, a life
and death business in which ethics make a difference. If a commander is incompetent, if a patrol
leader lies, if a medic sells his medications on the
black market, American soldiers are likely to die.
The interdependence of members of a technologically complex armed force makes honorable conduct more vital than ever before. For a military person, honesty, integrity, trust, and respect are not
empty clichés; they describe a way of doing military business that works.
In professional armed forces, authority is earned
by demonstrated professional competence and
dedication to subordinates’ personal, professional,
and familial welfare. Similarly, ethical values become relevant in supporting psychological readiness. In the post–Cold-War world, the personnel
who fight in this year’s intervention must be psychologically and physically ready to do it again next
year. They need ethical systems that adapt to a
broad range of missions and that facilitate rapid
recovery from an unpredictable array of morally
traumatic experiences. Rigid moral codes are not
useful; they are not sufficiently adaptable to support soldiers in ambiguous situations.
Everyone involved with national security needs
a military culture with coherent ethical values to
play his role effectively. The National Command
Authority depends on military ethics to assure that
forces carry out their missions faithfully and without excess. Commanders of units from army to platoon depend on integrity in reporting so they can
coordinate actions appropriately and allocate assets
where they are most needed. Individual service
members depend on situationally realistic ethical
understandings to sustain them in the midst of
moral chaos and to enable them to trust their leaders to bring them through their experiences.
There are many reasons why it is difficult to live
by ethical principles in a military culture. Telling
the truth can have unpleasant consequences when
superiors demand reassuring answers. Military service imposes so many challenges that some people
feel overwhelmed and conclude that they have no
choice other than to cover their inadequacies with
deceit. Others, faced with demand overload that
none of their superiors has the moral courage to
control, see two alternatives: lie, or get out. Choosing the harder right is just that—hard.
It is hard, but not impossible. In spite of a contemporary civilian culture that is contemptuous of
honor, indifferent to courage, and cynical about ethics, the armed forces of the United States entering
the 21st century are succeeding in their dogged
struggle to restore integrity to their culture. They
are succeeding because senior officers are insisting
on realistic missions and resources, intermediate
commanders are finding the courage to set priorities and trust their subordinates, and junior leaders are taking care of their troops and building professionally competent teams. Members at all levels
have regained a respect for and interest in the details of their profession. In the author’s view, privates and junior enlisted leaders in the 1990s were
more knowledgeable about their profession than
were most field grade officers of the 1950s and
1960s.
It is important to remember that integrity flourishes in a climate of mutual trust and respect across
ranks, and withers in a climate of insecurity and
fear. A man who feels he is trusted will in most situations strive to be worthy; a man who is watched
will get away with what he can. When a service
member finds the courage to choose the harder
right, he strengthens himself and the ethical climate
in his unit. No ethical act takes place in a vacuum;
others know about it, and take heart. Each time a
leader empowers a subordinate he takes a risk, because he is the one responsible. If he is to take the
risks that will build the confidence and competence
of his unit, he needs the security of knowing his
commander is supporting him. Commanders at
each level are the arbiters of the ethical climate of
their units. Their courage and integrity in setting
priorities, caring for their service members and their
families, and trusting their juniors sets the example
their subordinates will follow. Thus honor, combat
ethics, and military culture are the lifeblood of cohesion in the military and therefore of the ability of
the military to perform its mission.
193
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
REFERENCES
1.
Shay J. Achilles in Vietnam: Combat Trauma and the Undoing of Character. New York: Simon & Schuster Touchstone; 1995.
2.
Fromm E. Man for Himself: An Inquiry Into the Psychology of Ethics. Greenwich, Conn: Fawcett; 1947: 67.
3.
Shay J, Munroe J. Group and milieu therapy for veterans with complex posttraumatic stress disorder. In: Saigh
PA, Brenner JD, eds. Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Comprehensive Text. Boston: Allyn & Bacon; 1999: 391–413.
4.
Thurman MR Lieutenant General. Vice Chief of Staff, US Army (1983–1987); Commander-in-Chief, Southern
Command (1989–1990). Seven 4-hour interviews with author, 1993.
5.
Hackworth DH. About Face: The Odyssey of an American Warrior. New York: Simon & Schuster; 1989: 59–61.
6.
The Gulf War Syndrome: Pentagon now says chemicals may have harmed thousands. Time. 1996;148(28):33–35.
7.
Kirkland FR. Soldiers and marines at Chosin Reservoir: Criteria for assignment to combat command. Armed
Forces Soc. 1995;22(2)257–274.
8.
Sorley LM. Doing what’s right: Shaping the army’s professional environment. In: Matthews LJ, Brown DE, eds.
The Challenge of Military Leadership. Washington, DC: Pergamon-Brassey’s; 1989: 130–134.
9.
Mylander M. The Generals. New York: Dial Press; 1974: 211.
10.
Sullivan GR. A new force for a new century. Army. 1984;44(5):24–26.
11.
Kirkland FR. The gap between leadership policy and practice: A historical perspective. Parameters. 1990;20(3):50–62.
12.
US Department of the Army. Study on Military Professionalism. Carlisle Barracks, Pa: US Army War College; 1970.
13.
Kinnard D. The War Managers: American Generals Reflect on Vietnam. New York: Da Capo Press; 1991.
14.
Kitfield J. Prodigal Soldiers: How a Generation of Officers Born of Vietnam Revolutionized the American Style of War.
New York: Simon & Schuster; 1995.
15.
Dunnigan JF, Macedonia RM. Getting It Right: American Military Reforms After Vietnam to the Persian Gulf and
Beyond. New York: William Morrow; 1993.
16.
US War Department. General Regulations for the Army. Philadelphia, Pa: M Carey & Sons; 1821: 13, 15, 20.
17.
Coffman EM. The Old Army: A Portrait of the American Army in Peacetime, 1784–1898. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986: 194–197.
18.
Hauser WL. America’s Army in Crisis: A Study in Civil–Military Relations. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1973.
19.
Persons BS. Relieved of Command. Manhattan, Kan: Sunflower University Press; 1997: 23.
20.
Taylor FW. The Principles of Scientific Management. New York: Harper; 1911.
21.
Stouffer SA, Lumsdaine AA, Lumsdaine MH, et al. The American Soldier. Vol. II: Combat and its Aftermath.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1949: 520–524.
22.
Meyer EC, Ancell RM, Mahaffey J. Who Will Lead? Senior Leadership in the United States Army. Westport, Conn:
Praeger; 1995: 66.
194
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
23.
Ingraham L, Manning FJ. American military psychiatry. In: Gabriel RA. Military Psychiatry: A Comparative Perspective. Westport, Conn: Greenwood; 1986: 25–65.
24.
Westmoreland WC. From the army of the ’70s: A flawless performance. Army. 1970;20(10):11, 23–28.
25.
Gabriel RA, Savage PL. Crisis in Command: Mismanagement in the Army. New York: Hill & Wang; 1978: 66.
26.
Kirkland FR. Postcombat reentry. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes JW, eds. War
Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General and Borden Institute; 1994: 291–318.
27.
Kirkland FR, Katz P. Combat readiness and the Army family. Mil Rev. 1989;69(4):63–74.
28.
Marlowe DM, ed. Unit Manning System Field Evaluation. Technical Report No. 5 (ADA207193). Washington, DC:
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research; September 1987.
29.
Bassford C. The Spit-Shine Syndrome: Organizational Irrationality in the American Field Army. Westport, Conn:
Greenwood Press; 1988.
30.
Hawkins JP. Army of Hope, Army of Alienation: The American Army Communities of Cold War Germany. Westport,
Conn: Praeger; 2000.
31.
Richardson WR. Commanding General, US Army Training and Doctrine Command (1983–1986). Personal Communication, 8 October 1997.
32.
Clark A. The Donkeys. New York: Universal Publishing; 1965.
33.
Dixon NF. On the Psychology of Military Incompetence. London: Cape; 1976.
34.
Ruhe WJ. Slow Dance to Pearl Harbor: A Tin Can Ensign in Prewar America. Washington, DC: Brassey’s; 1995: 171–180.
35.
Friedenberg EZ. Coming of Age in America: Growth and Acquiescence. New York: Random House; 1965: 47–48.
36.
Faith JC. The overcontrolling leader: The issue is trust. Army. 1997;47(6):7–12.
37.
Falk RA, Kolko G, Lifton RJ, eds. Crimes of War: A Legal, Political-Documentary, and Psychological Inquiry Into the
Responsibility of Leaders, Citizens, and Soldiers for Criminal Acts in Wars. New York: Random House; 1971: 141–
161.
38.
Kirkland FR, Ender MG, Gifford RK, Wright KM, Marlowe DM. The human dimension in force projection:
Discipline under fire. Mil Rev. 1996;76(2):57–64.
39.
Scales RH Jr. Certain Victory: The US Army in the Gulf War. Washington, DC: Brassey’s; 1994.
40.
Crowell L. The anatomy of Just Cause: The forces involved, the adequacy of intelligence, and its success as a
joint operation. In: Watson BW, Tsouras PG, eds. Operation Just Cause: The US Intervention in Panama. Boulder,
Colo: Westview Press; 1991: 67–104.
41.
McConnell M. Just Cause: The Real Story of America’s High-Tech Invasion of Panama. New York: St Martin’s Press;
1991: 31.
42.
Flanagan EM. Battle for Panama: Inside Operation Just Cause. Washington, DC: Brassey’s; 1993: 40–41,209–214.
43.
Donnelly T, Roth M, Baker C. Operation Just Cause: The Storming of Panama. New York: Lexington Books, 1991:
98, 358–390.
44.
Caputo P. A Rumor of War. New York: Holt Rinehart & Winston; 1977: 106–110.
195
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
45.
Grossman DA. On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society. Boston: Little Brown &
Co; 1995.
46.
Sinnreich RH. To stand and fight. Army. 1997;47(7):15–19.
47.
Gruner E. What code? Or, no great escapes: The Code of Conduct and other dreams of resistance. Armed Forces
Soc. 1993;19(4):599–609.
48.
Groll-Ya’ari Y. Toward a normative code for the military. Armed Forces Soc. 1986;12(2):457–472.
49.
Marshall SLA. Men Against Fire: The Problem of Battle Command in Future War. Gloucester, Mass: Peter Smith; 1978.
50.
Smoler F. The secret of soldiers who didn’t shoot. Am Heritage. 1989;40(2):36–45.
51.
Kirkland FR, Halverson RR, Bliese PD. Stress and psychological readiness in post-Cold War operations. Parameters. 1996;26(2):79–91.
52.
Gunston B, Anderton DA, Cooper B; Batchelor J, illus. Air Power: A Modern Illustrated Military History. New
York: Exeter Books; 1979: 302.
53.
Wegg J. General Dynamics Aircraft and Their Predecessors. Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press; 1990: 233–238.
54.
Friedman N. US Cruisers: An Illustrated Design History. Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press; 1984: 479.
55.
Friedman N. US Destroyers: An Illustrated Design History. Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press; 1982: 423.
56.
Santoli A, ed. Everything We Had: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Thirty-Three American Soldiers Who
Fought It. New York: Ballantine Books; 1981: 23ff,57ff,80–81,94,101ff,121ff,136–137,185ff.
57.
Lanning ML. The Only War We Had: A Platoon Leader’s Journal of Vietnam. New York: Ivy Books; 1987.
58.
McDonough JR. Platoon Leader. New York: Bantam Books; 1985.
59.
Estep J. Comanche Six: Company Commander, Vietnam. Novato, Calif: Presidio Press; 1991: 51ff, 64, 91ff, 244.
60.
Kelly J. DMZ Diary: A Combat Marine’s Vietnam Memoir. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co; 1991: 50ff, 164–165.
61.
Kirkland FR, Ender MG. Analysis of Interview Data From Operation Just Cause. Washington, DC: Division of
Neuropsychiatry, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research; June 1991.
62.
Taylor TT. Lightning in the Storm: The 101st Air Assault Division in the Gulf War. New York: Hippocrene Books; 1994.
63.
Jones FD. Psychiatric lessons of war. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes JW, eds. War
Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General and Borden Institute; 1995: 1–33.
64.
Jones FD. Chronic post-traumatic stress disorders. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes
JW, eds. War Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General and
Borden Institute; 1995: 409–430.
65.
Marlowe DH. The human dimension of battle and combat breakdown. In: Gabriel RA, ed. Military Psychiatry: A
Comparative Perspective. Westport, Conn: Greenwood; 1986: 7–24.
66.
Shils EA, Janowitz M. Cohesion and disintegration in the Wehrmacht in World War II. Public Opin Q. 1948;
12:280–315.
67.
Kirkland FR. Assessing COHORT. Army. 1990;40(5):44–50.
196
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
68.
Koshes RJ, Young SA, Stokes JW. Debriefing following combat. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg
JM, Stokes JW, eds. War Psychiatry. In: Textbook of Military Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon
General and Borden Institute; 1995: 271–290.
69.
US Department of the Army. Leaders’ Manual for Combat Stress Control. Washington, DC: DA; 1994. Field Manual
22-52.
70.
Belenky G, Martin JA, Marcy SR. After-action critical incident stress debriefings and battle reconstructions
after combat. In: Martin JA, Sparacino LR, Belenky G, eds. The Gulf War and Mental Health: A Comprehensive
Guide. Westport, Conn: Praeger; 1996: 105–114.
71.
Pecano J, Hickey D. Stress debriefings following death from unexploded ordnance. In: Martin JA, Sparacino
LR, Belenky G, eds. The Gulf War and Mental Health: A Comprehensive Guide. Westport, Conn: Praeger; 1996: 125–134.
72.
Dinneen MP. Rapid interventions after a disaster at sea. In: Martin JA, Sparacino LR, Belenky G, eds. The Gulf
War and Mental Health: A Comprehensive Guide. Westport, Conn: Praeger; 1996: 135–144.
73.
Arendt H. On Violence. New York: Harcourt Brace World; 1970.
74.
Hackworth DH. Hazardous Duty: America’s Most Decorated Living Soldier Reports From the Front and Tells It the
Way It Is. New York: Avon Books; 1996.
75.
Cincinnatus [pseud]. Self-Destruction: The Disintegration and Decay of the United States Army During the Vietnam
Era. New York: Norton; 1981.
76.
Atkinson R. The Long Gray Line. Boston: Houghton Mifflin; 1989.
77.
Sheehan N. A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam. New York: Random House; 1988.
78.
US Department of the Army. Fighting Future Wars. New York: Brassey’s; 1994. Field Manual 100-5. Para 2-10 to 2-13.
79.
Bowden M, Tobia P. Blackhawk down: An American war story. The Philadelphia Inquirer. November 16–December 14, 1997.
80.
Stanton MN. A riot in Wanwaylen: Lessons learned. Army. 1994;44(12):24–30.
81.
Luvaas, J. Buna: 19 November 1942–2 January 1943. In: Heller CE, Stofft WA, eds. America’s First Battles, 1776–
1965. Lawrence, Kan: University of Kansas Press; 1986.
82.
Asprey RB. At Belleau Wood. Denton: University of North Texas Press; 1996.
83.
Mallonee RC. Mallonee RC II, ed. The Naked Flagpole: Battle for Bataan. From the Diary of Richard C. Mallonee. San
Rafael, Calif: Presidio Press; 1980.
84.
McIntyre WD. The Rise and Fall of the Singapore Naval Base, 1919–1942. Hamden, Conn: The Shoestring Press/
Archon Books; 1979.
85.
US War Department. Report of the Secretary of War’s Board on Officer–Enlisted Man Relations. Washington, DC:
Bureau of Public Relations; May 1946.
86.
Dupuy RE. The Compact History of the United States Army. New York: Hawthorn Books; 1956: 272–273.
87.
Weigley RF. History of the United States Army. Bloomington: Indiana University Press; 1984: 599–600.
88.
Newhouse PA, Belenky G, Thomas M, Thorne D, Sing H, Fertig J. The effects of d-amphetamine on arousal
cognition and mood after prolonged total sleep deprivation. Neuropsychopharmacol. 1989;2:153–164.
197
Honor, Combat Ethics, and Military Culture
89.
McCann UD, Penetar DM, Shaham Y, et al. Sleep deprivation and impaired cognition: Possible role of brain
catecholamines. Biol Psychiatry. 1992;31(11):1082–1097.
90.
Newhouse PA, Penetar D, Fertig J, et al. Stimulant drug effects on performance and behavior after prolonged
sleep deprivation: A comparison of amphetamine, nicotine, and deprenyl. Mil Psychol. 1992;4:207–233.
91.
Manning FJ, Ingraham LH. Continuous operations: Who melts, when and why? Field Artillery J. 1981;49(3):13–18.
92.
The Holy Bible, King James version. Matthew 26:38–45.
93.
Plato. Symposium. In Hamilton E, Cairns H. Plato: The Collected Dialogues. Joyce M, trans. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press; 1961.
94.
Stiehm JH. Women and the combat exemption. Parameters. 1980;10(2):51–59.
95.
Segal DR, Bachman JG, O’Malley PM. Propensity to serve in the US military. Armed Forces Soc. 1999;25(3):407–428.
96.
Kitfield J. Front and center. Natl J. 1997;29(43):2124–2129.
97.
Rosen LN, Durand DB, Bliese PD, Halverson RR, Rothberg JM, Harrison NL. Cohesion and readiness in gender
integrated combat service support units: The impact of acceptance of women and gender ratio. Armed Forces
Soc. 1996;22(4):537–553.
98.
Rosen LN, Martin L. Sexual harassment, cohesion, and combat readiness in US Army support units. Armed
Forces Soc. 1997;24(2):221–244.
99.
US Department of the Army. Standards of Medical Fitness. Washington, DC: DA; 1998. Army Regulation 40-501.
100.
US Department of the Army. Manual for Courts Martial. Washington, DC: DA; 1969. Miscellaneous Publication 9.
101.
US Department of the Army. Enlisted Personnel. Washington, DC: DA; 1996. Army Regulation 635-200, Para 151 to 15-4.
102.
US Department of the Army. Regular Army and Army Reserve Component Enlistment Program. Washington, DC:
DA; 1995. Army Regulation 601-210, Para 4-24(g).
103.
Policy concerning homosexuality in the armed forces. General Military Law, Armed Forces,10 USC Sect 654 (2000).
104.
Devilbiss NG. Gender integration and unit deployment: A study of GI Joe. Armed Forces Soc. 1985;11:523–552.
105.
US Army Research Institute. Women Content in Units Force Development Test (MAXWAC). Alexandria, Va: US
Army Research Institute; 1972.
106.
Finch M. Women in the military. In: Friedland JE, Gilroy G, Little RD, Sellman WS. Professionals on the Front
Line. Washington, DC: Brasseys; 1996: 246–255.
107.
Sarkesian SG, Williams JA, Bryant FB. Soldiers, Society, and National Security. Boulder, Colo: Lyn Rienner;
1995: 81–84.
198
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
