Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
293
Chapter 11
PHYSICIAN-SOLDIER: A MORAL
DILEMMA?
VICTOR W. SIDEL, MD*; AND BARRY S. LEVY, MD, MPH†
INTRODUCTION
FIVE ETHICAL DILEMMAS IN THE ROLE OF “PHYSICIAN-SOLDIER”
Subordinating the Best Interests of the Patient
Overriding Patients’ Wishes
Failing to Provide Care
Blurring Combatant and Noncombatant Roles
Preventing Physicians From Acting as Moral Agents Within the Military
ENHANCING PHYSICIANS’ ABILITY TO SERVE AS MORAL AGENTS
Restructuring Medical Service in the Military
Selecting Alternatives to Military Service
CONCLUSION
POINT/COUNTERPOINT—A RESPONSE TO DRS. SIDEL AND LEVY.
EDMUND G. HOWE, MD, JD‡
THE MORAL OBLIGATION OF UNITED STATES MILITARY MEDICAL
SERVICE. DOMINICK R. RASCONA, MD, FACP, FCCP§
*Distinguished University Professor of Social Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 111 East 210th
Street, Bronx, New York 10467; Adjunct Professor of Public Health, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York; formerly, President, American Public Health Association; President, Physicians for Social Responsibility; and President, International Physicians for the
Prevention of Nuclear War
†Adjunct Professor of Community Health, Tufts University School of Medicine, 20 North Main Street, #200, Post Office Box 1230, Sherborn,
Massachusetts 01770; formerly, President, American Public Health Association; and Executive Director, International Physicians for the
Prevention of Nuclear War
‡Formerly Major, Medical Corps, United States Army; currently, Director, Programs in Ethics, Professor of Psychiatry, and Associate Professor of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, Maryland 20814; and Chair,
Committee of Department of Defense Ethics Consultants to the Surgeons General
§Commander, Medical Corps, United States Navy; currently, Assistant Director, Critical Care, Naval Medical Center, Portsmouth, Virginia;
formerly, General Medical Officer, USS Iowa
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
294
Anne-Louis Girodet de Roucy
Hippocrate refusant les présents d’Artaxerces
1792
[Hippocrates refuses the gifts of Artaxerxes]
This painting was used as the model for a commemorative stone donated in 1855 by the American Medical Association for permanent placement in the Washington Monument being built in the District of Columbia. The stone, given
in “profound reverence to President Washington,”1 bears the inscription “Vincit Amor Patriae” (Love of Country
Prevails). It depicts the emissaries of Artaxerxes, the king of Persia, offering gifts to Hippocrates to induce him to
provide services to Persian soldiers suffering from plague. Hippocrates is said to have responded: “Tell your master
I am rich enough; honor will not permit me to succor the enemies of Greece.”2(p373) The painting illustrates the tension
between dedication by a physician to patriotism that may cause him to refuse service to the sick and dedication to
medical ethics that is generally held to require that medical care be offered to all who require it. Sources: (1) Stacey J.
The cover. JAMA. 1988;260(28):448. (2) Smith WD, ed. Hippocrates: Pseudoepigraphic Writings. New York: EJ Brill; 1990.
Image reproduced with permission from Bettmann/CORBIS.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
295
EDITORS’ NOTE: The following chapter is controversial. The field of ethics is a discipline of logical and philosophical analysis that requires debate. For true debate to occur, opposing viewpoints
must be advanced forcefully and analyzed rigorously. The editors recognized that examining opposing viewpoints could challenge even our most basic presuppositions and that these challenges
would cause discomfort. Were we not to include the challenges, we would fail to generate the required thoughtful analysis and debate.
This chapter challenges the very morality of physicians serving in the armed forces. The editors
selected Drs. Sidel and Levy to write this chapter because they are known for their strongly held
opposition to physicians serving as medical officers in the military. We asked them to advance their
strongest arguments and their most vigorous challenges. They have done so. Their arguments reflect a view of military medicine that is relatively prevalent among civilian physicians and civilian
medical ethicists and therefore we must understand their position. Drs. Sidel and Levy agreed to
write this chapter, and to make their best argument, for exactly that purpose—to generate controversy and initiate a critical examination of the issues physicians continue to face in military service
to their country. They have welcomed the editorial process and have eagerly debated their arguments. This informal dialogue has been very instructive for both parties to the debate.
The Editor-in-Chief recognized that publishing some of the dialogue would be helpful to our readers in beginning their own analysis of the opposing viewpoints. Dr. Howe, as an ethicist, was invited to respond directly to the ethical arguments Drs. Sidel and Levy advance. His response is
included as a rebuttal immediately following their text. Dr. Rascona, a physician in the Navy, was
invited to respond from the perspective of a doctor in uniform. We feel that his essay merits inclusion because it speaks to the motivation of many medical officers, and raises issues that are not
addressed by either Drs. Sidel and Levy or the rebuttal by Dr. Howe. It is inserted immediately
following Dr. Howe’s rebuttal. This three-pronged approach to the subject, although not exhaustive
of all possible views, at least frames the argument for further discussion.
Although the editors do not agree with the conclusions Drs. Sidel and Levy reach, we do feel that
there is great value in understanding their position. By exploring their argument we are forced to
examine our own positions and our reasons for holding them. By reexamining these positions while
considering their challenges, we achieve a greater clarity of the virtue of our conclusion that physicians must continue to serve in the military. In fact, as Drs. Howe and Rascona conclude, to do
otherwise would be unethical.
INTRODUCTION
The essence of ethical behavior is the ability to
make an appropriate choice between possible
courses of action. For a physician engaged in the
treatment of a patient, the ethical choice is usually
clear: The action should serve the best interests of
the patient as both the physician and the patient
define those interests. In the infrequent instances
when the patient’s and physician’s perceptions of
the best interests of the patient differ, it is usually
expected that the physician will act as the patient
wishes or, if the physician for some reason cannot
do so, that the physician will refer the patient to
another physician.
In some circumstances in which the physician has
obligations to others in addition to obligations to
the patient, a situation known as “mixed agency,”
the ethical choice may be more complex and thus
more difficult. There are many examples of mixed
agency in the practice of civilian medicine. Some of
these are brought about by the legal requirement to
report certain medical situations to the appropriate
agencies, such as reporting a case of hepatitis or
syphilis to public health authorities or a gunshot
wound to law enforcement authorities. There are
also employer requirements imposed on physicians
practicing occupational medicine or prison medicine, as well as requirements imposed by managed
care organizations on physicians. Clinical research
may also lead to mixed agency ethical conflicts. In
all of these situations of mixed agency ethical conflict
in civilian practice, however, there are usually ways
in which physicians can resolve them. If necessary,
physicians can withdraw from such situations by
referring patients to other physicians or resigning
positions that create the conflict situations.
The overriding ethical principles of medical practice in our view are “concern for the welfare of the
patient” and “primarily do no harm.” As we unMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
296
derstand them, the overriding principles of military
service are “concern for the effective function of the
fighting force” and “obedience to the command
structure.” Although there may be rare exceptions
to these principles, they have been the fundamental bases of medical practice and military service
over the centuries. In our view, the ethical principles
of medicine make medical practice under military
control fundamentally dysfunctional and unethical.
Medical practice under these conditions of military
control may be harmful to the personnel being cared
for, to the overall mission of the armed forces, and
to the practice of medicine—not only in the military service but in other settings as well.
We believe the role of the “physician-soldier” to be
an inherent moral impossibility because the military
physician, in an environment of military control, is
faced with difficult problems of mixed agency that
include obligations to the “fighting strength” and,
more broadly, to “national security.” Furthermore,
these physicians are assigned to specific duties and
committed for a fixed period to military service, both
of which preclude options that civilian physicians
have for resolving role conflict and the dilemmas inherent in those situations. We realize that soldiers have
a need and a right to medical care; we further acknowledge that the military believes it is the best provider
of this care. However, we assert that the military cannot provide the best medical care for its soldiers. This,
in our view, is because the ethical dilemmas associated with a system of medical care under military
control preclude the ethical provision of that care.
FIVE ETHICAL DILEMMAS IN THE ROLE OF “PHYSICIAN-SOLDIER”
In the sections that follow, we describe five ethical dilemmas in the role of “physician-soldier.”
Some of these dilemmas may occur in the context
of all-out war in which commanders believe every
resource must be marshaled literally to survive the
day. Such an instance may have occurred during
the opening days of the 1973 Arab-Israeli war when
Syrian tanks were moving down the hills, headed
for Israeli towns. However, we feel that (a) such a
scenario is extremely unlikely for a country such as
the United States, and (b) to subordinate the rights
of patients and the responsibilities of physicians to
prepare for what we feel is such an improbable
event is unwise and unnecessary. The five ethical
dilemmas that we will discuss, however, arise because military commanders may not distinguish
between what is realistically necessary and what
might be necessary in an unlikely scenario.
Subordinating the Best Interests of the Patient
There are a variety of ways in which the military
directly, as well as indirectly, subordinates the medical best interests of its soldiers. Surely the most
obvious is that of setting medical priorities for military purposes or performing medical research on
soldiers without their true informed consent. But
violating patient confidentiality, as well as failing
to keep adequate medical records, can also have
long-term consequences for individual soldiers.
Setting Medical Priorities for Military Purposes
The primary role of the military health professional is expressed in the motto of the US Army
Medical Department: “To conserve the fighting
strength.”1 This motto is usually understood as requiring adherence to generally accepted medical
goals, such as emphasis on health maintenance and
prevention of disease or injury. However, we feel
that the military aspects of the motto may at times
subtly, or not so subtly, override the medical aspects: Military health professionals may be required
to accept different priorities than do their civilian
colleagues. For example, a faculty member of the
Academy of Health Sciences at Fort Sam Houston
in 1988 cited as “the clear objective of all health service support operations” the goal stated in 1866 by
a veteran of the Army of the Potomac in the US Civil
War:
[to] strengthen the hands of the commanding general by keeping his Army in the most vigorous
health, thus rendering it, in the highest degree, efficient for enduring fatigue and privitation [sic],
and for fighting. 2(p145)
Attention to military needs and to patient-centered care may in most instances involve no ethical
conflict. One might assume that soldiers who will be
sent to fight must be soldiers who are healthy, and
therefore the soldier is not disadvantaged by a system that seeks to maintain him as a member of a
healthy and thus capable fighting force. The tasks
of providing service to respond to patient’s needs
and to respond to military needs and orders are
usually compatible. But when they are not, it is our
impression that the military physician is usually
expected to give higher priority to service to the
military. When these situations arise, we believe
that the military sometimes subordinates the best
interests of the patient to the good of the fighting
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
297
possessing what are usually regarded as human
rights), is that of using them as subjects in medical
research for military purposes without their free
and informed consent. The Nuremberg Code, as
well as accepted practice in the United States, requires the free and informed consent of human subjects. Because they cannot simply “quit their jobs”
or “file a grievance” with a union, government
agency, or professional organization, military personnel may not believe that they can truly refuse to
participate in these experiments. They may feel
more like a “captive audience” than like “volunteers.” Furthermore, they may not be fully informed
of the risks for a variety of reasons, including national security. Examples from the more than 50
years since the Nuremberg Code was promulgated
include US troops required to be present at atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons in the later 1940s
and 1950s,6–8 and troops who participated in chemical weapons experiments in the 1950s and 1960s. 9
(See Chapter 17, The Cold War and Beyond: Covert
and Deceptive American Medical Experimentation,
and Chapter 19, The Human Volunteer in Military
Biomedical Research, for further discussion of various research programs during this period.)
In 1990, following Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, the
Department of Defense (DoD) requested a waiver
that would permit military use of investigational
drugs and vaccines without informed consent. The
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted the
request and issued a new general regulation, Rule
23(d), which permits drug-by-drug waiver of informed consent by the DoD. Pyridostigmine bromide (PB), a drug approved by the FDA for treatment of myasthenia gravis, was used under such a
waiver as a “pretreatment” for the effects of nerve
agents. It is our view that the absence of informed
consent for use of a drug for purposes unapproved
by the FDA is unethical except under extraordinary
circumstances, which we feel were not present in
this case. Furthermore, in our view there was inadequate evidence that PB would have been effective
if an agent had been used. 10–13
Additional threats to free and informed consent
were posed by the regulations promulgated in 1996
by the Food and Drug Administration, and the Office for Protection from Research Risks, Department
of Health and Human Services. These regulations
permitted the waiver of informed consent from subjects who lack the capacity to give informed consent
for potentially lifesaving experimental treatment in
emergency situations, provided that “community
consultation” is conducted. (An example would be
a car accident victim in a comatose state for whom
no next of kin can be quickly located.) The nature
force or the completion of the mission.
An example of ethical conflict between military
needs and patient-centered care arose in the use of
penicillin for US military personnel in North Africa during World War II, a time when limited
amounts of penicillin were available. 3 The ethical
dilemma was clear: Should the limited amount of
penicillin be used for treatment of serious chest
wounds or instead for treatment of disease, including venereal disease? The dilemma was often resolved in favor of treatment of disease that would
respond rapidly and effectively to penicillin rather
than using the penicillin for soldiers with infection
of their serious wounds because that choice would
permit earlier return of a soldier to duty.
Analyses of articles published in Military Medicine concerning military medical triage describe
how medical priorities are set for military purposes.
We are concerned that military physicians when
making these decisions may put the needs of the
military inappropriately before the needs of the patient. Military physicians, when writing about triage, generally define a group of casualties termed
“expectant,” who are to be “made comfortable.”
Other casualties, termed “the walking wounded”
by Swan and Swan,4 “can have their wounds dressed
very quickly, their weapons returned to them, and
their paths redirected forward rather than rearward.”4(p448) “Triage, of course,” they state, “requires
difficult decisions and poses ethical and moral dilemmas for the uninitiated.”4(p448) Janousek and colleagues define those in the category “expectant” as
“patients with injuries requiring extensive treatment
that exceeds the medical resources available.”5(p333)
These analyses discuss the dilemmas of triage but
do not go on to suggest that limited medical resources be allocated on the basis of urgency of medical need rather than on the basis of military priorities. (Nor do these analyses suggest that physicians
ought to be able to use their own discretion when
deciding who should be treated within the guidelines of triage, and who should be treated according to the physician’s own sense of what is medically and ethically right for this particular patient.)
This issue of setting medical priorities according to
military purposes also raises questions about using military discipline to override patients’ wishes
in treating soldiers “for their own good,” covered
in the next section.
Performing Medical Research on Soldiers
Without Informed Consent
Another example of treating soldiers as soldiers,
rather than as patients (or indeed as human beings
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
298
of “community consultation” in a closed institution
with hierarchical structure, like the armed forces,
has not yet been fully explored. 14,15
Violating Patient Confidentiality
Patient confidentiality may be breached in military medicine in the name of military or national
security. 16,17 Violation of patient privacy would be
unacceptable in civilian practice except under circumstances strictly defined by law, but it is generally accepted that a commanding officer can request
disclosure by the medical officer of all medical information relevant to military performance. The
commander is free to determine what he believes
to be soldier behavior that allows him to request
this information. The medical officer is likewise free
to determine whether or not he agrees with the commander that this information should be given to the
commander. Whether or not the medical officer
agrees with the commander may in large part be
driven by the degree to which the medical officer
identifies with the military unit, rather than with
his patients as individuals. It may also be influenced
by the medical officer’s perception of what difficulties may follow if he refuses to comply with the
commander’s request.
Failing to Keep Adequate Records
Thus far in this discussion of subordinating the
best interests of the patient, we have examined the
setting of medical priorities for military purposes,
performing medical research without true informed
consent, and violating patient confidentiality. Of
these, the first two have the greatest potential for
long-term medical consequences of an adverse nature. Soldiers who have been treated according to
military guidelines, or subjected to medical research, may indeed develop problems later in life
(after separation or retirement from the military)
that can best be treated by full disclosure of all procedures or agents to which they were exposed. They
deserve no less than full disclosure. However, the
military does not always keep adequate or accurate
records, or even necessarily see the need for such.
For example, the Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses was sharply critical of the military’s poor record keeping on immunizations during the Persian Gulf War. 18 The failure
to maintain adequate records and perform adequate
follow-up on the 150,000 US troops who received
anthrax vaccine during the Persian Gulf War is, in
our opinion, inexcusable. Had the data been appropriately collected, they may have shed light on a
possible relationship with the symptom complex
known as Gulf War illnesses and possibly resolved
current questions about the safety of the anthrax
vaccine. We believe this situation was an example
of subordinating data keeping necessary for the
well-being of individual patients to the military
mission.
Overriding Patients’ Wishes
As we indicated previously, soldiers lack some
of the protection that their civilian counterparts
have: the ability to “quit the job” or to appeal for
help to another organization with power, such as a
union. In addition, military physicians have more
coercive capabilities than most of their civilian
counterparts. The military physician has enormous
power to override the wishes of individual patients
“for the patient’s own good.” This powerful paternalism is permitted, and may indeed be fostered,
both by the power and self-image of the individual
military physician and by the power and wishes of
the command structure. (This is an issue quite different from the use of military discipline in support
of the “fighting force” to override the patient’s
wishes and at times the patient’s best interest discussed in the previous section.) The power of the
military medical officer over the patient has enormous potential for clouding the physician’s judgment and, indeed, for corrupting the physician. It
is our belief that physicians in other “total institutions,” such as prisons and mental hospitals, also
have the opportunity to substitute their values and
their judgments for those of the patient and the
patient’s family.
Imposing Immunization for the Good of the
Patient
This ability of the physician to make decisions
for the “good of the patient” can best be seen in the
field of immunization of soldiers. As this is a situation in which the full pressure of the military system
can be brought to bear on an individual soldier, it
will be discussed in some detail. The military may
require immunizations, both to protect the fighting
force and “for the soldier’s own good.” It is not difficult to see the need for some specific immunizations to protect the fighting force, especially in those
instances where troops are deploying to an area
with a known incidence of a specific disease and
there is an effective, safe, FDA-approved vaccine
for the disease to which the troops most likely
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
299
would be exposed.
It is also easy to understand that some vaccinations have a long lead time before they are fully effective and therefore need to be given even if no
specific deployment is anticipated. This is similar
to required vaccinations to attend school or to travel
overseas. Communities have the need and the right
to protect themselves from the spread of known
preventable diseases. When immunization is required in civilian public health practice to protect
others beyond the individuals immunized, as in the
case of an infectious disease spread from person to
person, few would argue against immunization for
community protection. We have no argument with
that position being taken by the military. But we
would disagree with the military if it believed immunization for a disease not spread from person to
person is required to protect the individual simply
for the good of the fighting force and required the
individual to be immunized for that reason alone.
There are other instances in which the need, and
thus the requirement, for immunization is not clearcut. This can present an ethical dilemma. It is in
these latter instances that the power to override a
soldier’s refusal permits the military physician to
substitute the physician’s (and the military’s) judgment for that of the patient. Furthermore, even if a
specific immunization may be of benefit to the individual soldier in the short run, we still believe
that imposing immunizations on soldiers is an unethical practice violating the soldier’s autonomy
and destructive of good patient care in the long run
because the soldier is not an active participant in
decisions relative to his personal healthcare.
We are particularly concerned about the process
by which these decisions are made. Because they
involve the military responding to the possibility
of a disease exposure, there is great room for error
in addressing just how possible a given exposure
scenario might be. An example of a situation in
which troops were not permitted to refuse a vaccine was the required administration of anthrax
vaccine. Anthrax has long been considered a potential biological weapon because anthrax spores remain infectious under a wide range of adverse conditions. Anthrax spores are believed to have been
stockpiled by Iraq and perhaps by other nations as
well. During the Persian Gulf War (1990–1991) there
were reports that the Iraqis had developed the necessary stockpiles, had been working on a delivery
system, and were going to use anthrax as a biological weapon against coalition forces. In December
1997, despite ongoing public controversy about the
safety of the anthrax vaccine, the Pentagon announced that all 2. 4 million active duty military
personnel and reservists would be inoculated
against anthrax. 19 The vaccine that the Pentagon
began using was first developed during the 1950s,
then reformulated in the 1960s, and finally approved by the FDA for general use in 1970. The vaccine had previously seen limited use; the vaccination
of all military personnel represented a significant
increase in the numbers of individuals receiving this
vaccination.
Unfortunately, the evidence that the current vaccine would be effective in protecting troops against
airborne infection with anthrax, the pathway that
would most likely be used by biological weapons,
was, in our view, questionable. The only published
human efficacy trial of an anthrax vaccine was a study
performed 40 years ago that demonstrated protective
value against cutaneous anthrax; however, there
were an insufficient number of cases of inhalational
anthrax to demonstrate efficacy. 20 It would be unethical to conduct a controlled trial that involved purposeful exposure of humans to inhalational anthrax,
but experiments have been conducted exposing
monkeys and guinea pigs to inhalational anthrax. 21,22 These trials have yielded contradictory
results. In fact, in 1994, 3 years before the Department
of Defense announced its mandatory vaccination
program, the Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee
examined the issue of efficacy and safety of the vaccine and recommended that “the vaccine should be
considered investigational when used as a protection against biologic warfare.”23 More recent experiments (1998) using rhesus macaques24 have led to
greater conviction by the military that the vaccine
may be effective against the strain of anthrax to
which the macaques were exposed. The difficulty
lies in the fact that the military has no way of knowing if the strain used on the macaques will be similar to the strain that might be used as a weapon
against humans. Further complicating the question
of efficacy is the consideration that new strains of
anthrax may have been developed specifically to
defeat the current vaccine. Recombinant DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) technology may be used to
alter agents that cause illness so that they are no
longer as susceptible to vaccines or antibiotics. 25
Even if the vaccine could be demonstrated to
protect against all strains of anthrax (which is currently not possible), the potential risks of mass administration of anthrax vaccine to military personnel were, in our view, largely unknown. Experience
with other vaccines that have been used widely after relatively small field trials indicates that unanticipated problems can develop in the course of
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
300
massive use of approved drugs or vaccines. (The
best-known example of such problems was that of
the “swine flu” vaccine. 26,27) With each additional
immunization for a possible bioterror threat, the
likelihood of adverse reactions increases. Furthermore, conduct of immunization programs by the
military in the past, including its recordkeeping,
does not inspire confidence. The Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses,
which (as already noted) was sharply critical of the
military’s poor recordkeeping on immunizations
during the Persian Gulf War, more recently characterized the Pentagon’s efforts to improve its medical
recordkeeping in Bosnia,28 where it used tick-borne
encephalitis vaccine, as an “abysmal failure.”18
As we have noted, the military also failed to
maintain adequate records or perform adequate
follow-up of the 150,000 US troops who received
anthrax vaccine during the Persian Gulf War. Given
the massive scope and potential risk of this program, the interests of military personnel as well as
the public would be better served if researchers
unaffiliated with the Pentagon had been permitted
to conduct further studies on the vaccine. The later
analysis by the Institute of Medicine,29 although in
our view incomplete, supported the decision to use
the vaccine. Another ethical issue lies in the question of informed consent by troops ordered to take
a vaccine and whether they have a right to refuse
without punishment. Several hundred members of
the US armed forces refused to accept inoculation
with the mandatory anthrax vaccine and many were
threatened with punishment. 30 In addition, the US
military should have encouraged its physicians to
have accurately and quickly reported any adverse
reactions to the vaccine, not only to the appropriate authorities, but also to the service personnel who
may be taking the vaccination, to enable the latter
to make an informed choice in their own healthcare.
In summary, we disagree with the military’s requiring administration of a vaccine that may have been
of questionable efficacy and safety, as we allege in
the case of the anthrax vaccine, when problems with
medical recordkeeping may make it impossible to
track who might have received a “bad” batch of
vaccine.
A report by the Subcommittee on National Security, Veterans Affairs and International Relations,
17 February 2000, criticized the DoD Anthrax Vaccine
Immunization Program (AVIP). The subcommittee
found “the AVIP a well-intentioned but overwrought response to the threat of anthrax as a biological weapon.…As a health care effort, the AVIP
compromises the practice of medicine to achieve
military objectives.”31(pp1–2)
Addressing Psychiatric Problems From a Military
Perspective
In dealing with work performance by military
personnel, difficult issues arise, particularly in relation to psychiatric problems that present in combat
theaters. Is battle fatigue or a severe stress reaction
simply a normal reaction to an abnormal situation
to be treated by rest (“three hots and a cot”) and
prompt return to the battlefield, or are these symptoms of illness that require more treatment? The
practice of “overevacuation” (the presumed excessive transfer of ill or injured personnel to a safe area
rather than back to the frontlines of the military
operation) has been cited as “one of the cardinal
sins of military medicine.”1(p186) This value judgment
is presumably based on overevacuation being a service to the patient and a disservice to the fighting
force, hence the ethical dilemma. We believe the
military physician must be free to make such decisions in the best interest of the patient.
Performing Battlefield Triage
The question that arises in battlefield triage is
stark: How far can a military physician go in the
course of making decisions in the best interest of
the patient? Battlefield triage may be seen by the
military physician as being “for the soldier’s own
good.” But when a wounded soldier is in agony,
with no hope of effective treatment, evacuation, or
reasonable pain relief, is it ethical for the military
physician to use large doses of analgesia for the
“dual purpose” of relieving pain and hastening
death? Although the “double effect” is well recognized and accepted in medical ethical circles, its use
in military situations may be ethically questionable.
Even more troubling is the scenario in which there
is no way to help the suffering soldier and, furthermore, his cries are likely to give away the position
of the rest of the unit, thus jeopardizing others. Is it
ethical for the physician to use large doses of analgesia in such a situation? Although this situation
may be unlikely, it is an example of the type of dilemma making military medicine difficult. How
might the physician’s identification with the unit
affect such decision making? Would the physician
even be aware of the influence of the well-being of
others on this decision making? In military practice, however, it is our belief that the medical ofPhysician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
301
ficer might assume the authority to make such decisions either to protect the fighting force (as discussed earlier) or “for the soldier’s own good.”32
Thus far we have presented two ethical dilemmas
in the role of the physician-soldier: subordinating
the best interests of the patient and overriding patients’ wishes. In both sets of situations, care has
been given to patients: the dilemma has been that
this care may not have been what the patient needed
or wanted, and the physicians have not necessarily
been free to fully advise the patients, as these physicians might in a civilian setting, about what might
be in the patients’ best interests. We will now turn
to a particularly troublesome area, that of failing to
provide appropriate care to soldiers in other military units, civilians, and enemy soldiers.
Failing to Provide Care
Before we discuss failing to provide care, let us
briefly recapitulate the more recent history of the
codification of the role of the physician in combat,
with both its restrictions and requirements. Beginning in the middle of the 19th century, a series of
international conventions was negotiated that were
ultimately codified in a single, formal document in
Geneva in 1949; together, they are called the Geneva
Conventions. Agreed to at that time by 60 nations,
the conventions were declared binding upon all
nations according to “customary law, the usages
established among civilized people…the laws of
humanity, and the dictates of the public conscience.”33 They included: the Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and
Sick in Armed Forces in the Field; the Convention
for the Amelioration of the Wounded, Sick, and
Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea; the
Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners
of War; and the Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Under the conventions, medical personnel are
singled out for certain specific protections by an
explicit separation of the healing from the wounding roles. Medical personnel and treatment facilities
are designated as immune from attack, and captured
medical personnel are to be promptly repatriated.
In return, specific obligations are required of medical personnel,33,34 as summarized in the following list:
1.
Regarded as “noncombatants,” medical
personnel are forbidden to engage in or be
parties to acts of war.
2.
The wounded and sick soldier and civilian—friend and foe—must be respected,
protected, treated humanely, and cared for
by the belligerents.
3.
The wounded and sick must not be left
without medical assistance and the order
of their treatment must be based on the
urgency of their medical needs.
4.
Medical aid must be dispensed solely on
medical grounds, “without any adverse
distinction founded on sex, race, nationality, religion, political opinions, or any other
similar criteria.”35(p28)
5.
Medical personnel shall exercise no physical or moral coercion against protected
persons (civilians), in particular to obtain
information from them or from third parties.
Such duties are imposed clearly, permitting no
exceptions, and given priority over all other considerations. Thus, the Geneva Conventions formalized the recognition that, although professional expertise merits special privileges, it likewise incurs
very specific legal and moral obligations. That special role of physicians is now embodied in public
expectations and in the ethical training of doctors
in most societies. It is also embedded in the World
Medical Association’s Declaration of Geneva,36
which is administered as a “modern Hippocratic
Oath” to graduating classes at many civilian medical schools.
How does the military medical community approach that special role of physicians as codified in
the Geneva Conventions and embodied in public
expectations? The Geneva Conventions and the Law
of Land Warfare, which reinforces the Conventions,
are required elements of instruction for all US military personnel, including healthcare professionals.
However, unless instructors have as their primary
goal the indoctrination of medical officers to follow
the dictates of the Geneva Conventions, the Conventions will likely be taught in the context of the
overall military mission, leading to the reinterpretation or neglect of the Conventions that can occur
within a military unit. The ways in which the Geneva
Conventions are taught (or neglected) will thus influence the self-image and role of the medical officer. It is our opinion that military medical training gives insufficient attention to the requirements
of the Geneva Conventions and too much attention
to the coherence and interdependence of the various components and missions of the military force.
It is not surprising, therefore, that an analysis of
triage in Military Medicine, previously cited, states:
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
302
“[T]raditionally US combat casualty care has been
directed toward US casualties first, allies second,
civilians third, and enemy fourth. This is a time for
reevaluation of ethical and moral principles and a
reaffirmation that if the most seriously injured casualty is, in fact, an enemy soldier, he goes first.”4(p451)
We question if such a reevaluation is taking place
and if medical personnel who have as a primary
duty the conservation of the fighting strength of
their own forces would be willing to alter their priorities in this way. This certainly is an indication
that, indeed, it is an inherent moral impossibility
to be a physician-soldier, especially when it comes
to the treatment of those seen as “others.” Following the hierarchy described in the Military Medicine
article, we will first discuss providing care for other
US soldiers, continue with treatment of civilians,
and end with treatment of enemy soldiers.
Failing to Provide Care to Other Soldiers
The military physician may become very closely
identified with the command structure in which the
physician serves. This happens because the military
physician who trains or works closely with a unit,
particularly with an elite unit, over a long period
of time becomes dependent on the unit, just as the
unit becomes dependent on the physician. Health
professionals who are members of military units feel
“bonded” to “their own” and may feel pressure
from their commanders and peers to give preference to care for their own troops even if the medical needs of their own troops are less urgent than
those of others. This was seen among the health
aides serving with the Green Berets during the IndoChina War. 37 It may then be impossible for the physician to set priorities based solely on medical need.
Failing to Provide Care to Civilians
Civilians are increasingly being injured or killed
during the conduct of contemporary war (Figure 111). In fact, 90% of deaths reported in selected wars
in the 1990s were among civilians, many of them
women and children. 38 Civilian homes are also damaged or destroyed, and their occupants are forced
to move on, becoming “internally displaced persons” who are generally without healthcare. They
are often in great need of health services, not only
for war-related injuries and psychological trauma
but also for ongoing health needs, such as diabetes.
Except in very special circumstances in which
military physicians are specifically assigned to provide medical care for civilian populations, however,
military physicians may not provide such care—
even for those whose need is greater than for military personnel. Unless the command structure for
military physicians specifically requires them to
base priorities for medical care on medical need,
no matter whose need is involved, care for civilians may have low priority or none at all.
Failing to Provide Care to Enemy Soldiers
Despite obligations under the Geneva Conventions to provide care to enemy soldiers (these obligations are discussed in greater detail in Chapter
23, Military Medicine in War: The Geneva Conventions Today, in the second volume of this two-volume textbook of Military Medical Ethics), there are
reasons why military medical personnel may be
unwilling or unable to accede to these obligations.
For instance, refusal to treat the “enemy” for reasons of “patriotism” or “national security,” may be
seen by some physicians as so important that these
supersede the physician’s ethical responsibilities to
patients. This is not a recent development, nor is it
restricted to military physicians. In about 400 BC,
the Great King of Persia, Artaxerxes II, sent emissaries to Hippocrates to ask him, “with the promise of a fee of many talents,” to help in the treatment of Persian soldiers who were dying of the
plague. Hippocrates is reported to have dismissed
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
67%
90%
75%
14%
WWII
1990s
1980s
WWI
Percent of All Deaths
Fig 11-1. Civilian deaths as a percentage of all deaths in
selected 20th-century wars. Source: Adapted from data
provided by Ahlstram, C. Casualties of Conflict: Report for
the Protection of Victims of War. Uppsala, Sweden: Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala University, 1991. Cited in: Bellamy C. The State of the World’s
Children 1996. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996.
Reproduced with permission from Levy BS, Sidel VW,
eds. War and Public Health. New York: Oxford University
Press; 1997: 33.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
303
the emissaries, stating that he would never “put his
skill at the service of Barbarians who were enemies
of Greece.”39(p448) Centuries later this sentiment still
resonated with physicians. Just before the start of
the US Civil War, the American Medical Association (AMA) selected as the model for a commemorative stone carving for placement in the Washington Monument, then being built in the District of
Columbia, the painting “Hippocrates Refuses the
Gifts of Artaxerxes.” The inscription the AMA selected for the stone was “Vincit Amor Patriae” [Love
of Country Prevails]. 40 These are powerful sentiments, held by both civilian and military physicians,
and still in existence even with the codification of
rights and responsibilities in the Geneva Conventions. These sentiments will influence behavior.
Ethical conflicts arise for military health personnel because they are a part of the armed forces. They
wear the uniform, they observe the regulations and
formalities, and they bond with their fellow soldiers.
Simply put, it is easy for these medical professionals to see themselves as “us” and enemy soldiers as
“them.” It is true that the Geneva Conventions forbid military services to require that their healthcare
personnel give preference in care to their own
troops or deny care to others, even members of the
“enemy” force in times of war. The Law of Land Warfare41 specifically reinforces this duty of medical
impartiality. Neither document, however, addresses
the human tendency to bond and identify with one’s
“own type” and to turn against those seen as “others.” As long as physicians in the service of the military continue to be part of the military, including
wearing the uniform, they will be susceptible to this
human tendency to divide people into “us” and
“them” rather than into categories of patients needing attention based solely upon their medical needs.
It is our opinion that military physicians cannot, as
members of the armed forces, live up to the expectations and responsibilities of the Geneva Conventions.
Up to this point we have been discussing military physicians and their tendency to subordinate
the best interests of their patients, to override their
patients’ wishes, and to fail to provide care to others in accordance with the requirements of the
Geneva Conventions. All of these dilemmas we believe are directly related to the structure of the military itself, and the placement of the medical services within that structure. We have mentioned the
powerful bonds that can develop when physicians
overidentify with the warriors whom they tend to.
Sometimes this overidentification leads to a blurring of the line between combatant and noncombatant roles.
Blurring Combatant and Noncombatant Roles
If one describes a scene of a doctor, weapon in
hand, it is natural to assume that the doctor is defending self or patients from an imminent or actual
attack. That may be the most frequent circumstance
under which doctors take up arms and inflict injury or death upon the enemy. That, however, is not
the blurring of roles that we will be addressing. When
we offer the image of the doctor, “weapon in hand,”
we refer instead to that most troubling of images,
which is that of the doctor actively participating in
combat, or perhaps less actively participating but
nonetheless subverting the aim and intent of medicine. We will begin our discussion first with the
image that is most abhorrent: that of the doctor as a
voluntary and active combatant.
Participating in Combatant Roles
The Geneva Conventions require strict separation
of the military and medical care functions, but this
has not always been the case for these two professions. Perhaps history’s most dramatic attempt to
meld these conflicting obligations of curing as opposed to killing was made by the Knights Hospitallers
of St. John of Jerusalem, members of a religious order founded in the 11th century. With a sworn fealty to “our Lords the Sick,” the Knights defended
their hospitals against “enemies of the Faith,” becoming the first organized military medical officers. They were “warring physicians who could
strike the enemy mighty blows, and yet later bind
up the wounds of that same enemy along with those
of their own comrades.”34(pp1695–1696)
In the 19th century in the United States there
were instances in which medical officers were
clearly combatants without any apparent immediate need to protect those under their medical care.
In 1861, Bernard J.D. Irwin, an Assistant Surgeon
in the US Army “voluntarily took command of
troops and attacked and defeated hostile Indians
he met on the way”42(p206) at Indian Pass, Arizona.
He was awarded the Medal of Honor in 1894. In
1865, Jacob F. Raud, an Assistant Surgeon in the
210th Pennsylvania Infantry, during the Civil War,
“[d]iscovering a flank movement by the enemy [at
Hatcher’s Run, Virginia], appraised the commanding general at great peril, and though a noncombatant voluntarily participated with the troops in repelling this attack.”42(pp184–185) He was awarded the
Medal of Honor in 1896.
The most prominent of these medical combatants
was Leonard Wood, who, as a recent graduate of
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
304
the Harvard Medical School and a civilian contract
surgeon in the US Army in the Southwest in 1886,
“[v]oluntarily carried dispatches through a region
infested with hostile Indians, making a journey of
70 miles in one night and walking 30 miles the next
day. Also for several weeks, while in close pursuit
of Geronimo’s band and constantly expecting an
encounter, commanded a detachment of Infantry,
which was then without an officer, and to the command of which he was assigned upon his own
request.”42(p235) Wood was awarded the Medal of
Honor for his action and, after appointment as a
Major General in the Regular Army in 1903, was in
1910 appointed Chief of Staff of the US Army. In
the case of Leonard Wood, one might say in his defense that he had requested the infantry assignment
that allowed him to pursue Geronimo, and therefore he was not really a physician during this time.
Our question, however, is whether it should be ethically permissible for a medical officer to quit his
medical role for a combatant role either temporarily
or for a longer period.
Using Medicine as a Weapon
It was in the period after the end of World War II
that the US Army’s Special Forces were instituted,
with the mission of “winning the hearts and minds”
of indigenous populations, especially in Vietnam,
to further the military mission. One of the positions
in the Special Forces was that of the aidman, trained
in rudimentary medical skills. Dr. Peter Bourne,
who had been an Army physician working with the
Special Forces in Vietnam, wrote that the primary
task of Special Forces Medics was “to seek and destroy the enemy and only incidentally to take care
of the medical needs of others on the patrol.”43(p303)
These Special Forces aidmen were not considered
protected medical personnel but rather were classified as combatants. Although their primary task
was as combatants, aidmen also administered medical assistance to their own forces, and could do the
same for other persons deemed to need assistance.
The military, by combining combat capabilities with
medical skills had perverted medical care into a
“weapon.” These aidmen could offer care to indigenous populations, especially if it served the need
of the Special Forces mission. We have previously
discussed the potential hierarchy of medical care
(first take care of one’s own, then allies, then civilians, then the enemy, without respect to severity of
wound) that may be followed by military medical
personnel. Just because these aidmen were not considered medical personnel by the US Army does not
mean that the indigenous population did not see
them as medical personnel who could choose to
help or not. Even though Special Forces aidmen do
not wear a “Red Cross” or similar medical emblem,
once the aidman opens the bag and offers medicine,
he becomes a “helper” in the eyes of the “patient,”
and this deception is clearly unethical.
This issue of the role of medicine in the overall
military mission was at the center of US v Levy, a
case adjudicated in the military legal system. In
1967, Howard Levy, a dermatologist drafted into the
US Army Medical Department as a captain, refused
to obey an order to train Special Forces Aidmen in
dermatological skills. He refused specifically on the
grounds that the Aidmen were being trained predominantly for a combat role and that cross training in medical techniques eroded the distinction
between combatants and noncombatants. For this
refusal he was charged with one of the most serious breaches of the Uniform Code of Military Justice: willfully disobeying a lawful order. Tried by a
general court-martial in 1967, Levy admitted his
disobedience saying he had acted in accordance
with his ethical principles. The physicians who testified for the defense, including one of the authors
of this chapter (VWS), “argued that the political use
of medicine by the Special Forces jeopardized the
entire tradition of the noncombatant status of
medicine.”44(p1346) They agreed with Levy that a physician is responsible for even the secondary ethical
implications of his acts—that he must not only act
ethically himself, but also anticipate that those to
whom he teaches medicine will act ethically as well.
Levy was given a dishonorable discharge and sentenced to serve 3 years in a military prison. Levy’s
appeals were not successful. 45 The case of Howard
Levy sent a message to other military physicians
that the military organization would define for them
what was ethical and what was not. This organizational intrusion into the ethics of medicine is yet
another indication that the physician-soldier is expected to be first and foremost a soldier who obeys
the orders of superiors, and only secondarily a physician who follows his conscience and his ethics.
Participating in Militarily Useful Research and
Development
It is a blunt and brutal fact of war that weapons
systems are designed to render the enemy ineffective, generally by causing such destruction, maiming, and killing, or the fear of these, that the enemy
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
305
is unable or unwilling to fight. These offensive systems must, of necessity, take into consideration
physical and medical facts, such as the amount of
force necessary to penetrate structures and disable
or kill their inhabitants. Inside or outside the armed
forces, some health professionals are involved in
militarily useful research and development, such
as work on biological weapons or on the radiation
effects of nuclear weapons. In such work, it is said
to have been common practice to concentrate physicians into “principally or primarily defensive operations.”46 But work on weapons and their effects
can never be exclusively defensive, and at times the
distinction is quite arbitrary. The question arises
whether there is a special ethical duty for physicians (because of their medical obligation to “do no
harm”) to refuse to participate in such work, or
whether in non–patient-care situations physicians
simply share the ethical duties of all human beings. 47 It is our contention, again, that physicians
are always physicians and therefore should adhere
to their ethical duty to “do no harm.” They should
be very vigilant about whatever work they may do
pertaining to weapons systems, and what might
ultimately be done with the results of their work. If
they are unable to ascertain the final use of their
work, we believe the ethically responsible action
would be to resign from that task.
Participating in, or Failing to Report, Torture
In the section on research and development, we
have alluded to the fact that knowledge of human
physiology is a part of the development of offensive weapons as well as defensive strategies for
dealing with such weapons. A more egregious example of the use of medical knowledge is that of
participating in, or failing to report, torture. It is
important to remember that physicians have been
given the privilege by society to learn about the
human body, including what can be endured or
what cannot. Using such knowledge to facilitate
torture is indeed an abhorrent activity.
We have also noted that physician-soldiers are
vulnerable to the influence of military organizations, whether that influence is subtle or overt. An
example of military forces attempting to influence
medical officers to violate their ethical standards is
illustrated by evidence from Turkey.
After legislative changes in the aftermath of the
1980 military coup, a military school of medicine
was established for the purpose of training doctors
solely for the military. In a ceremony at this military school, the head of the junta, addressing the
soldier students, said: ‘You are first and foremost
soldiers, and only after that doctors.’ This was evidence that military doctors were expected and
obliged to give priority to the chain-of-command,
above and over the medical code of ethics. 48(p77)
Of even greater concern is the actual participation of physicians in torture, as was the case with
some military physicians in Uruguay who assisted
in the systematic use of torture during the military
dictatorship from 1972 to 1983. 49 Although it is clear
that Turkey and Uruguay have different procedures
for military personnel than does the United States,
the fervor that drove military personnel to perform
these acts may at times influence practices in other
nations. There is no legal basis for US armed service commanders to order the use of torture to elicit
information from enemy prisoners. In fact, an order to perform such actions should be refused by
the military health professional and the commander
who ordered it could be charged with issuing an
illegal order. In order to take such an action, however, the military healthcare professional would
have to believe that no harm would come to him
from refusing to obey or from bringing charges
against the commander, or would need to be willing to suffer the consequences of taking personal
action. Military physicians would feel freer to pursue the dictates of their conscience if there were a
better sense of the moral agency of the military
physician.
It is less clear that a medical officer who reports
the torture would not be ostracized or even subjected to military discipline. As with the “informal
hierarchy” that influences which patients get
treated first by military physicians, there is also
likely to be a strong, through informal, sense of “us”
and “them,” shared by physician and soldier alike.
By being part of the military unit, these physiciansoldiers are more likely to agree that such a reprehensible action as participating in torture might be
justified under some circumstances. This tendency
to overidentify with the unit, its personnel, and its
mission, is yet another reason why physicians
should not be a formal part of these military organizations.
Preventing Physicians From Acting as Moral
Agents Within the Military
The case of Captain Howard Levy, the dermatologist who refused to train Special Forces Aidmen,
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
306
illustrates that those who adhere to their moral compass and refuse to pervert medicine for the sake of
the military mission may face sanctions for their
actions. In the following discussion, the focus will
be on three areas in which the military interferes
with physicians as moral agents by: (1) preventing
physicians’ attempts to protect military personnel;
(2) preventing physicians from taking moral actions
in military operations; and (3) preventing physicians from expressing their moral protest. By stifling the ability of physicians to act as moral agents,
the military increases the likelihood that medicine
will be used inappropriately.
Preventing Moral Actions by Physicians in
Military Operations
There is considerable literature on “total institutions,” such as prisons and mental hospitals, in
which the role of the individual to make independent decisions is severely limited. 50 A number of
specific issues that are related to the health
professional’s role in the military as a “total institution” have already been discussed. The impact of
the total institution on medical ethics is particularly
seen in the field situation. The field commander
may not understand the perspective or the needs
of the health professional or may not have time to
evaluate the ethical dilemma the health professional
faces. Response to psychiatric conditions may pose
special problems in the field. The health professional’s
inability to refuse to obey orders, even when the
orders conflict with ethical judgments, is an example of the effect of the military institution on
medical ethics. The Levy case, discussed previously,
demonstrates the conflict between medical ethics
and military practice. This effect is obvious in the
area of preventing moral protest actions by military personnel, especially physicians. It is to this
area that we will now turn for a rather lengthy discussion of the issues of suppressing moral protest,
and what it means for the individuals involved, the
medical profession, the military, and society itself.
Preventing Moral Protest Actions by Physicians
When physicians don the military uniform, and
raise their hand to take the oath of induction into
the armed forces, they do more than join an organization. They also leave behind their civilian life and
with it many of the basic rights that they enjoyed
as civilians. Chief among these rights is that of actively participating in the political process, including the right to publicly protest as members of their
profession. Medical personnel in the United States
have, for example, joined protests against the disastrous effects on the civilian population of Iraq
of the sanctions imposed by the United Nations
since the end of the Persian Gulf War and the effects
on the civilian population of Cuba of the sanctions
imposed by the United States. Like all members of
the armed forces, military health professionals are
limited by threat of military discipline in the extent
to which they can publicly protest what they believe to be unjust or harmful acts. (Military personnel cannot publicly make contemptuous statements
about the President or other officials, nor can they
make statements held to be disloyal.) The decision
in February 2002 by military reserve personnel in
Israel to refuse assignment to the occupied territories on moral grounds is, in our view, a recent example of a moral action that contravenes military
policy. 51
The question we pose is simple: Does a military
physician have a special responsibility or a special
right to criticize military practices in medicine or in
general? Should military medical personnel have had
the right, as moral agents, to protest the US/NATO
(North Atlantic Treaty Organization) attack on
Serbian forces that allegedly led to “collateral damage” to civilians? Should military medical personnel have had the right, as moral agents, to protest
the US military forces bombing of the Al Shifa pharmaceutical plant in the Sudan, which allegedly provided half the medicines for the North African region?52 We believe that they should have this right of
moral protest, but we also acknowledge that within
the military, the sanctions are significant for engaging in protest of acts deemed to be unjust or harmful.
Just as military personnel cannot publicly protest what they believe to be unjust acts, they are
also limited in the extent to which they can publicly protest what they believe to be an unjust war.
The issue of what is a “just war,”53,54 which has been
debated for over two millennia, is developed more
fully in Chapter 8, Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War, in this volume. There are generally held to be two elements in a just war: jus ad
bellum (when is it just to go to war?), and jus in bello
(what methods may be used in a just war?). Among
the elements required for jus ad bellum are a just
grievance and the exhaustion of all means, short of
war, to settle the grievance. Among the elements
required for jus in bello are protection of noncombatants and proportionality of force, including
avoiding (a) use of weapons of mass destruction,
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
307
such as chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons;
and (b) massive bombing of cities.
Membership in the armed forces, even in a noncombatant role such as that of a physician, may require self-censorship of public doubts about the
justness of a war in which the armed forces are engaged. However, many health professionals consider
themselves pacifists. “Absolute pacifists” oppose
the use of any force against another human being,
even in self-defense against direct, personal attack.
They believe that the use of force can only be ended
when all humans refuse to use it, and that acceptance
of one’s own injury or even death is preferable to
use of force against another. (When a military force
threatens genocide, as the Nazis attempted in World
War II, many who might otherwise adopt a pacifist
or limited pacifist position believe that force may
be justified. Their shift in position is based on the
threat to the very survival of the group, a threat that
to some makes untenable the pacifist argument that
current failure to resist will lead to future diminution in violence.) More limited forms of pacifism
hold that the use of certain weapons of mass destruction in war is never justified, no matter how
great the provocation or how terrible the consequences of failure to use them.
There is considerable debate whether health professionals, because of a special dedication to preservation of life and health, have a special obligation
to serve or to refuse to serve in a military effort. That
position is made more complex by a role as a military noncombatant. Many military forces nonetheless permit health professionals, like other military
personnel, to claim conscientious objector status. In
the United States, conscientious objection is defined
as “[a] firm, fixed and sincere objection to participation in war in any form or the bearing of arms
because of religious training or belief.”55(p16) Religious training and belief is defined as “[b]elief in
an external power or being or deeply held moral or
ethical belief, to which all else is subordinate…and
which has the power or force to affect moral wellbeing.”55(pp16–17) The person claiming conscientious
objector status must convince a military hearing
officer that the objection is sincere. 56 Those who
oppose war in all forms can be released from military service, as has been discussed in Chapter 9, The
Soldier and Autonomy, in this volume.
Physicians who are situational pacifists (ie, they
have refused to support a specific war effort rather
than war in general) have great difficulty in the
military. In a recent and well-publicized example,
Yolanda Huet-Vaughn, a physician and captain in
the US Army Medical Service Reserve, refused to
obey an order for assignment to active duty before
the beginning of the Persian Gulf War in 1990. In
her statement, she explained:
I am refusing orders to be an accomplice in what I
consider an immoral, inhumane and unconstitutional
act, namely an offensive military mobilization in
the Middle East. My oath as a citizen soldier to defend the Constitution, my oath as a physician to
preserve human life and prevent disease, and my
responsibility as a human being to the preservation
of this planet, would be violated if I cooperate…57
The reasons Huet-Vaughn gave for her action
were quite different from the reasons given by Levy
more than two decades earlier. Levy refused to obey
an order that he believed required him to perform
a specific act that would violate the Geneva Conventions; Huet-Vaughn refused to obey an order she
believed required her to support a particular war
that she felt to be unjust and destructive to the goals
of medicine and humanity. After Huet-Vaughn’s
conviction at court-martial for “refusal to obey a lawful order” (to report for transfer to the Persian Gulf),
she was imprisoned at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.
If a health professional considers service in support of a particular war to be unethical on the
grounds of medical ethics, may or indeed must he
refuse to serve, even if that objection does not
qualify for formal conscientious objector status?
Furthermore, is there an ethical difference if the
service is required by the society as in a “doctor
draft,” or if the service obligation has been entered
into voluntarily to fulfill an obligation in return for
military support of medical education, training, or
for other reasons? Is military service indeed a “voluntary obligation” if enlistment, as it is for many
poor and minority people, is, in part, induced by
their lack of educational or employment opportunities or, as it is for many health professionals, by
the cost of education or training that in other societies is provided at public expense? These are difficult questions to answer.
Although few health professionals are willing or
able to take an action such as that taken by HuetVaughn, other actions are available to oppose acts
of war considered unjust, to oppose a specific war,
or to oppose war in general. Additional issues for
military medical officers have been raised by the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice (World Court) in 199658 that the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons is contrary to international
law except under extraordinary circumstances. FurMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
308
thermore, with the ratification by the United States
of the Chemical Weapons Convention59 and its coming in force in 1997, there are other concerns for
military physicians as well. (These concerns are
addressed by the Federation of American Scientists60 and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. 61) If medical officers in any nation are aware that use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons, which has been declared contrary to international law by the International Court of Justice, or that use or threat of use of chemical or biological weapons, which is banned by the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention, remains part of the war plans of the
armed services they serve, what is their obligation
under international law? This is a question that
surely needs to be answered to ensure that military
physicians are moral agents.
ENHANCING PHYSICIANS’ ABILITY TO SERVE AS MORAL AGENTS
We propose that a dialogue begin between the
military command structure and the military and
civilian medical communities to address these issues. We believe health professionals have a special ethical responsibility, in view of their obligation to protect the health of their patients and their
community members, to refuse to support a war
they believe will cause major destruction to health
and environment. 62,63 Furthermore, we believe that
both the military and the civilian society it protects
will be more ethical if these issues are discussed and
resolved.
If, as we believe, the physician cannot act as a
moral agent within the military, what possible alternatives are there? We propose two that should
be considered in any dialogue seeking to enhance
physicians’ ability to function as moral agents in
both the military and the society it serves. These
are (1) restructuring military medical service to allow for physicians to be moral agents, or (2) allowing physicians to select alternative service in the
event of a doctor draft.
Restructuring Medical Service in the Military
An important reason for a health professional to
become or remain a member of the armed forces of
a nation is to use the position as an opportunity to
insist on behavior that is consistent with ethical
values and international humanitarian law. In 1985,
Colonel Malham Wakin, Professor and Head of the
Department of Philosophy and Fine Arts at the
United States Air Force Academy, published an article entitled “Wanted: Moral Values in the Military.”64
Colonel Wakin, after analyzing the circumstances
surrounding the killing of at least 175 unarmed Vietnamese prisoners, many of them obviously noncombatants, by American soldiers at My Lai in March
1968, called for “persons of excellent moral character to serve and lead the profession of arms.”64(p26) We
applaud and endorse the statement of Colonel Wakin,
but would amend it to address specifically the needs
of the medical profession. If the military medical profession were suffused with persons of excellent moral
character, it is conceivable that the military medical
profession would exert more influence on the command structure above it to consider not just the tactical considerations of military decisions, but also the
humanitarian aspects of these decisions.
If the nature of the roles of those serving in the
medical services of the armed forces is sufficiently
changed and if those serving have the strength of
character to avoid ethical compromise, they can
make an important contribution to the moral level
of the military. 65,66 One of the most important responsibilities that medical officers have is to make
certain that they, other medical personnel, and all
members of the military do not commit unethical
acts. (Unfortunately, physicians in the armed forces
of some nations have participated in or refused to
report such violations. 67–70) There are other examples
of contributions to military ethics by health professionals. 71–73 Although these contributions are important, it is our view that extremely limited opportunities exist under a structure of military control of
the medical system for military health professionals to contribute effectively to military ethics. It is
possible, but seems to us unlikely, that the structure could be changed sufficiently to permit ethical
service and ethical contributions by medical officers. If adequate change cannot come from within
the military, what options are available for these
services to be provided outside the military? The
only other option we can identify is that physicians
treating military personnel remain outside the control and indoctrination of the military.
Selecting Alternatives to Military Service
If ethical service in the military by health professionals is, as we assert, impossible, it is time to ponder what alternatives are available to health professionals. These alternatives may take the form of
overt dissent, of seeking conscientious objector status, or serving in a nonmilitary health organization.
With civilians now accounting for 90% of those
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
309
killed in war and with threats of the use of weapons of mass destruction continuing, is any form of
military service appropriate for the ethical health
professional? We would offer that one response,
suggested in the late 1930s by John A. Ryle, then
Regius Professor of Physic at the University of Cambridge, remains relevant today:
It is everywhere a recognized and humane principle that prevention should be preferred to cure.
By withholding service from the Armed Forces before and during war, by declining to examine and
inoculate recruits, by refusing sanitary advice and
the training and command of ambulances, clearing stations, medical transport, and hospitals, the
doctors could so cripple the efficiency of the staff
and aggravate the difficulties of campaign and so
damage the morale of the troops that war would
become almost unthinkable. 74(p8)
We realize that it may be an invalid assumption
that the war effort of all belligerents would cease if
no medical support were provided. In addition, refusal to serve is not a viable option for physicians
in a number of present-day countries in which dissent of this type is not permitted. Nonetheless we
feel it is important to state this opposition, even if
others counter that it is naive, because by stating
this opposition we can foster discussion of these
ethical dilemmas. Such an effort to encourage dialogue was made during the Vietnam War when
more than 300 American medical students and
young physicians applied Ryle’s argument to the
war in Indochina by signing the following pledge:
In the name of freedom the US is waging an unjustifiable war in Viet Nam and is causing incalculable
suffering. It is the goal of the medical profession to
prevent and relieve human suffering. My effort to
pursue this goal is meaningless in the context of the
war. Therefore, I refuse to serve in the Armed Forces
in Viet Nam; and so that I may exercise my profession with conscience and dignity, I intend to seek
means to serve my country which are compatible with
the preservation and enrichment of life. 75(p306)
Public protests such as these by physicians may
have played a role in the efforts of civil society in
the United States to end the war in Vietnam, and
more generally illustrate the role physicians may
play in effecting change.
A physician’s right to refuse to serve in the military at all on a conscientious objector basis is complicated by the status of the physician as a noncombatant. When military service by physicians is required
through a doctor draft, the physician may not be able
to avoid the ethical problems caused by mixed agency
and may not be permitted to resign on a conscientious objector basis. When military service by physicians is voluntary, the so-called noncombatant status
of health professionals in military service may also
prevent the volunteer medical officer from resigning
on a conscientious objector basis when ethical conflict arises—as was the case for Dr. Huet-Vaughn.
Other health professionals may wish to accept a
service alternative consistent with an ethical obligation to protect health and prevent illness or to
care for those wounded or maimed, without simultaneously supporting a war effort. Although opportunities for service in an international corps, such
as Médecins du Monde or Médecins sans Frontiéres
(which was awarded the 1999 Nobel Peace Prize),
are limited, health professionals may have opportunities to work with such organizations. If humankind is to survive, health professionals may need
to consider new forms of national service and to
contribute, in a broader sense, to their nation and
the world. 76,77 We believe that at some point in the
future (even though it clearly has not been that way
in the past [Figure 11-2]), the world will truly evolve
into a “global community” in which individuals as
well as nations will understand that what people
have in common is far greater than their areas of
difference. At that point we believe that a global
perspective on medical care will help ensure that
all humans have equal and competent care. Until
this is achieved, what should the medical community do in a world in which war is an all too commonplace occurrence?
We believe health professionals have a special responsibility to attempt to prevent injury and death
to both military personnel and civilians. Therefore,
they may wish, as individuals and in groups, to help
prevent war wherever it may occur. The health professional should do so by contributing to public and
professional understanding of the nature of modern war, the risks of weapons of mass destruction,
and the nature and effectiveness of alternatives to war.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter we have looked at the ethical dilemmas we see as significant barriers to the provision of ethical military healthcare. Specifically, these
were subordinating the best interests of the patient,
overriding patients’ wishes, failing to provide care,
blurring combatant and noncombatant roles, and
preventing physicians from acting as moral agents
within the military. This chapter has also explored
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
310
b
a
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
311
Fig. 11-2. This series of figures illustrates the ways in which war has increasingly targeted civilian populations, a topic we believe of major concern to military physicians. (a) War portrayed in the 15th century:
Battaglia (Battle), Paolo Uccello, circa 1450. The Battle of San Romano was fought in 1432 in a war between
Florence and Siena. The combatants are on horseback and the painting shows the carnage that resulted to
the men and to the horses involved; no civilians are shown. Paolo Uccello produced three paintings of the
Battaglia di San Romano. One hangs in the Uffizi Museum in Florence, one in the National Gallery in
London, and one in the Louvre in Paris. Image © Archivo Iconografico, S.A./CORBIS, reproduced with
permission. (b) War portrayed in the 19th century: Assault on the Breach of San Sebastian, Mark Churms.
The battle was fought in 1813 as part of the Peninsula War. This painting shows care for wounded British
soldiers; no civilians are shown. “The Storming party, 750 volunteers, … moved off at two in the morning
on 31 August 1813, and occupied a ruined convent where they remained till half past nine….[for] the
attack on the breach which could not be entered except in single file under heavy fire. The troops attacked
in succession, but were struck down by hundreds. … A shell ignited a quantity of powder, and under
cover of the explosions, the storming party forced its way into the town. San Sebastian was savagely
sacked and burned, and the … civilians were raped, robbed, and murdered in revenge for the heavy losses
suffered by the troops. “ (Text by Atlanta Clifford, assistant to the Curator-The Guards Museum)…. Image
© Mark Churms, reproduced with permission. (c) War portrayed in the 20th century: Guernica, Pablo Picasso,
1937. On 26 April 1937, 43 German planes bombed the Basque city of Guernica in northern Spain, killing
more than 20% of its 7,000 residents. The attack marked the beginning of terror bombing of civilian targets
in the Spanish Civil War, which continued through the bombing in World War II of Warsaw, Rotterdam,
London, Coventry, Hamburg, Dresden, Osaka, Tokyo, Hiroshima, and Nagasaki, among many other cities. This painting was commissioned by the government of Spain, which asked him to prepare it for
exhibition at the Spanish pavilion at the 1937 Paris World’s Fair. After the fair closed, the supporters of the
Spanish government during the Spanish Civil War sent the painting on a tour of cities ending in New York
City, where the painting spent the years during World War II and after at the Museum of Modern Art and
is still on its website. After Spain returned to democratic government, the painting was sent back to Spain
and now hangs in the Reina Sofia Museum in Madrid. Image © Archivo Iconografico, S.A./CORBIS, reproduced with permission. Image © 2003 Estate of Pablo Picasso/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York,
reproduced with permission.
c
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
312
In summary, we believe it is morally unacceptable for a physician to serve as both a physician and
a soldier in the United States military forces, and
probably in other military forces as well. The ethical dilemmas for military medical personnel analyzed in this chapter and the ethical dilemmas faced
by health professionals engaged in peacemaking
and peacekeeping activities outside the military are
often distorted by the fervor that may accompany
war and preparation for war. These dilemmas,
which require dispassionate analysis and action in
times of peace, are being widely discussed in and
out of the armed forces. Each military medical officer, in our view, has a duty to participate actively
in this discussion and to evaluate the ethical conflicts involved in his role.
what happens when individual physicians seek to
act in accordance with their ethical beliefs. The military system, large, impersonal, and formidable, dispenses its own version of justice. The imprisonment
of Captain Levy during the Vietnam War era and
Captain Huet-Vaughn during the Persian Gulf War
era both demonstrate the military response to the
overt expression of physician conscience. If war
were becoming a thing of the past because nations
were seeking arbitration to their differences, then
we might modify our opposition to medical professionals in the military. This, sadly, is not the case.
We have also proposed that a dialogue be undertaken among military command structures, military
physicians, and civilian physicians to discuss these
dilemmas and to develop solutions for them.
POINT/COUNTERPOINT—A RESPONSE TO DRS. SIDEL AND LEVY
Acknowledgments
This chapter is, in part, based on previous chapters and articles: Sidel VW. Aesculapius and Mars.
The Lancet 1968;966–967; Sidel VW. Quid est amor patriae? PSR Quarterly 1991;1:96–104; Sidel VW.
Warfare I. Medicine and War. In: Reich WT, ed. Encyclopedia of Bioethics, 2nd Ed. New York: Macmillan,
1995; 2533–2588; and Sidel VW. The role and ethics of health professionals in war. In: Levy BS, Sidel
VW, eds. War and Public Health. New York: Oxford University Press; 1997: Chap 18. The authors are
grateful to Tod Ensign, H. Jack Geiger, John C. Moskop, and Edmund Pellegrino for their suggestions.
An ethical argument is sound only to the degree
that it recognizes the strongest arguments against
it and shows why they are wrong. Sidel and Levy
add a critical component to this textbook because
they provide the first of these two requirements.
They present the strongest arguments that they and
others have made against several military medical
practices. 78,79 The task remaining is to show which,
if any, of their arguments is not valid and why.
Their contribution, however, goes beyond providing these arguments. In challenging military
medical practices, they reopen them for discussion.
This could lead to new practices that are morally
preferable. This, of course, is one of the major purposes of this textbook—to explore military medical
ethics and suggest areas for improvement. Just as
importantly, military physicians may from time-totime ask themselves the same questions Sidel and
Levy ask or be confronted with these questions by
others. To maintain their sense of moral integrity,
they must know how to answer these questions.
Providing some of these answers will be the
thrust of this response. To do this most clearly, I
shall address Sidel and Levy’s arguments in essentially the same order in which they gave them. I
shall do primarily two things: (1) I shall indicate
where Sidel and Levy’s arguments go wrong, and
(2) where they offer challenges that warrant discussion or could result in military medicine caring for
patients better, or both.
Rebuttal of Key Points
In their Introduction, Sidel and Levy state rightly
that the same kind of conflicts that military doctors
face exist in civilian contexts as well. They state
rightly, also, that soldiers have a need and right to
medical care. As both these comments suggest, they
do not claim that doctors shouldn’t care for soldiers
who are wounded during combat. They do claim
that these doctors should not be members of the
armed forces, but rather should be neutral care providers. They state that some ways in which medical care in the military is structured is suboptimal
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
313
applied. Correspondingly, whenever military physicians apply these principles, they should be sure
this is necessary. 81 To do this they must also maintain ongoing communication with line commanders so that if and when it becomes no longer necessary to apply these principles, they can immediately
reinstitute triage principles that would apply in a
civilian setting. Optimal structures may be in place
for exchange of information between the line and
the military physician. If they are not, they should
be established.
Medical Research
Sidel and Levy wholly misunderstand the basis
on which soldiers were required to take preventive
agents to protect themselves from biological and
chemical weaponry during the Persian Gulf War.
They contend the use of PB as a pretreatment for
the effects of nerve agents was unethical because
of the absence of informed consent and because the
drug was not approved by the FDA for this purpose. They also contend that the “extraordinary circumstances” necessary to warrant use of the drug
were not present and furthermore that there was
inadequate evidence that PB would have been effective. Based on Saddam Hussein’s previous use
of chemical agents against the Kurds in northern
Iraq, there was ample reason to believe that he could
have used this weaponry against coalition forces
during this war. There was also unequivocal evidence
that these protective agents would have helped. The
use of these agents was solely protective. 82
There are many nonmedical examples of requiring soldiers to use protection against an identified
threat (for example, chemical protective over garments [CPOG], “flak” jackets, Kevlar helmets),
some of which have medical complications associated with them (heat injury caused by wearing the
CPOG or body armor). Although the preventive
agents required during the Persian Gulf War would
not fully protect soldiers if biological or chemical
weaponry were used, they would nonetheless help.
This belief was based on the best scientific evidence,
evaluated by the most knowledgeable military and
civilian authorities at this time.
(In fact, then, as now, research standards are exceptionally strenuous in the military. Many feel they
are too strict, because some research, which can be
done in civilian settings, simply can’t be done in
the military. For example, military institutional review boards (IRBs) most rigorously question
whether servicepersons are free from inherently
and that this results in inferior ethical outcomes.
They list these. I shall discuss these separately and
then their overall conclusion that doctors should not
serve as members of the armed forces.
Military Medical Triage
Sidel and Levy accept the underlying principles
and rationale of military medical triage, namely,
that if a war would be lost if minimally wounded
soldiers were not returned to the battle, the military missions must be placed first. Therefore the
minimally wounded must be treated before those
more seriously injured for there to be the greatest
good for the greatest number. This practice must
be pursued to protect soldiers and, ultimately, this
country, as well as other countries that would need
this country’s assistance to protect themselves. (The
concept of differing models of triage is discussed
more fully in Chapter 13.) However, they disagree
with how and when these principles are applied.
They assert that military physicians are unduly
vulnerable to identifying with military, as opposed
to patients’, interests and, thus they could apply
military medical triage principles too readily.
Their premise is sound. If military doctors apply
these principles of triage too readily this would lead
to those seriously wounded soldiers who are not
treated first losing their lives unnecessarily. Although
their premise is sound, their assumption is incorrect. Line officers, who have far greater expertise
and information than military physicians regarding the needs of the military mission, ultimately
determine the ethical priorities military physicians
must follow. If, for example, soldiers are ill but can
fight, line officers (having been informed by military physicians regarding these soldiers’ health)
decide whether they still should fight under these
conditions. 80 This is what should occur. Those who
are most capable of deciding what is necessary to
best prevent such horrors as global genocide should
be the ones to do so. The only other option would
be to let persons with less expertise, such as physicians, make these decisions.
Here, despite their misunderstanding of triage,
is a first example in which their challenge could
enhance military medical care. For the best and most
informed decisions to be made by the commander,
there must be open and forthright communication
between physicians and commanders. Military physicians must give line commanders information so
that these commanders then can best decide when
the military medical triage principles should be
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
314
coercive factors so that they can decide without
pressure whether they want to participate in research. The protective agents soldiers were required
to take during the Persian Gulf War were not, then,
given at all for the purpose of research. They were
given to soldiers to save their lives in spite of the
fact that they had not been, and could not be, adequately tested for this purpose.)
Although Sidel and Levy misunderstand why
soldiers had to take these preventive agents, their
challenge makes a valid and important point. Because biological and chemical weaponry could be
used against us, if agents are protective they should
be used if they could substantially reduce the harm
these weapons could cause. Still, the potential gains
will always be uncertain and the risks unknown.
This will especially be the case as new weaponry
and protective agents are developed. 83,84
It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that the
best scientific data be gathered, continually updated, and assessed by both military and civilian
experts, as they were during the Persian Gulf War.
Even with the best scientific knowledge, however,
the ethical decision of when an agent should be used
will remain problematic. The persons who should
decide this should be fully knowledgeable of military needs and realities, unbiased, and representative of the public will. For such a group to be able
to respond in as timely a manner as may be required, it may be that a new structure to do this is
needed. To ensure that these scientific judgments
aren’t inadvertently biased, civilian experts should
be among those making these assessments, as was
the case during the Persian Gulf War.
The one way soldiers’ autonomy can be best respected even under these conditions is to inform
them fully before they enlist that they may have to
take some protective agents not adequately tested
for this use. That they may need to do this is now
common knowledge, but this could and, perhaps,
should be done more extensively and explicitly. A
structural innovation Sidel and Levy encourage
could be this: When soldiers enlist, they should be
briefed about this, then tested to help ensure that
they know they could be required to take protective agents. (This model of testing is now used
sometimes when persons agree to participate in research. To some, this testing in research represents
the ethical edge of this field.)
Sidel and Levy make another valid and important point concerning the “voluntary” nature of
military service and thus the ability to grant informed consent. They assert rightly that persons
may gain a great deal by joining the military. They
may, for example, escape poverty and learn a trade.
This incentive makes their decision to join the military inherently coercive. Thus, they cannot freely
choose whether to enter the military and accept
being required to take these protective agents. This
kind of problem has occurred before. It occurred,
for example, when men joined the military just before the US entrance into World War II, when many
were jobless as a result of the economic depression
of the 1930s. This concern rightly reflects the importance of protecting those most vulnerable. Thus,
Sidel and Levy here provide an additional reason
for informing soldiers that they may have to take
protective agents prior to their enlisting.
Sidel and Levy also comment about untested
treatments and the need for community consultation. Again, they are right. If any treatment is not
fully tested and is given to soldiers, they are at additional risk. If they would be given this treatment
on the battlefield but are so stricken that they are
not competent, these soldiers couldn’t consent.
There is then a need for others to provide consent
for them on their behalf, or for community consultation. An aspect of this situation they do not mention, however, is that if these soldiers would otherwise die, these treatments, though not fully tested,
may save their lives. As with protective agents, these
treatments would not be given for the purpose of research, but rather for the purpose of treatment.
Because soldiers risk their lives for the greater
society, they may deserve special access to these
treatments on the ground of compensatory justice.
(See Chapter 26, A Look Toward the Future, and
Chapter 27, A Proposed Ethic for Military Medicine,
for a discussion of this concept). The application of
this principle has, in fact, already begun. Effort is
now being undertaken to make a new, possibly lifesaving, intervention available to soldiers stricken
on the battlefield who otherwise would die. The
structure for doing this is just being developed and
involves IRBs. Its purpose, however, is not primarily research. Its purpose is to save soldiers’ lives.
It represents a compassionate, earlier use of a new
treatment, much like earlier use is now permitted
for civilian patients who have cancer or acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). It may be that
this compassionate use should have been instituted
long before. Regardless, as Sidel and Levy suggest,
there must be a structure to maximize the likelihood
that these untested treatments will be helpful as
opposed to harmful. The present structure of IRBs
may or may not suffice.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
315
Confidentiality
Sidel and Levy believe that the medical officer
can decide what patient information is confidential. They also believe that the medical officer may
be unduly biased in favor of the military. The thrust
of their concern is valid and important. That military physicians are vulnerable to acquiring such a
bias is beyond controversy. 85 Military doctors can,
however, refer requests for confidential medical information to military lawyers. These lawyers can
then decide what, if any, information is critical to
meeting mission needs. Sidel and Levy are right
that military doctors may fail to do this when they
can and should. This also may be, as they claim,
because military doctors overidentify with the
needs of the military or are afraid of taking a stand
that opposes higher authorities. 86
This is an instance in which these authors’ appeal for structural change and innovation may be
particularly sound. This change could require, for
example, military physicians being required to refer such requests to a third party, such as the military lawyer. It could also allow, time permitting, for
an appeal. So that the urgency of the request could
be reasonably assessed, commanding officers requesting such records could be required to indicate
how soon they need these records, and give the rationale for their urgency.
Here, however, the military lawyer, like the military physician, may be unduly biased. Thus, there
may be a need for some check on their decisions,
such as involving civilians in the process. The risk
this poses is that these civilians must be fully knowledgeable regarding the military’s genuine needs
and realities or else the results can be untoward. If
they are not, their judgments, though well-intentioned, may place soldiers and the world population at greater risk. Civilians having this knowledge
is, consequently, an absolute limiting factor.
Failing to Keep Adequate Records
Sidel and Levy assert that the military’s keeping
inadequate records during the Persian Gulf War was
inexcusable. Whether excusable or not, this was a
mistake. Accordingly, it now has been corrected. 87
Ironically, one of the reasons adequate records
weren’t obtained at this time was the fear that this
record-keeping would fuel the misperception that
the use of preventive agents was for the purpose of
research, not treatment. This is, of course, the same
misperception that Sidel and Levy had. Despite
their misperception, their challenge on recordkeeping was of value. The lesson for military physicians
in the future that Sidel and Levy’s challenge initiates is this: To the extent possible, military authorities should do what they know is medically best
for soldiers, regardless of their fears about how the
public may respond. In this case, this would have
meant the military’s keeping optimal records, regardless of how the public and even experts such
as Sidel and Levy might have viewed this.
Imposing Immunization for the Good of the
Patient
The authors use vaccination of soldiers as an example of overriding patients’ wishes. They agree
with requiring immunizations in “civilian public
health practice to protect others beyond the individuals immunized, as in the case of an infectious
disease spread from person to person.” The intention here is to protect society from the harm of having many members of that society die from the infectious disease. The community has the “need and
the right to protect [itself] from the spread of known
preventable diseases.” They also agree that the
wishes of the individual sometimes have to be subordinated to the needs of the society. Civilian quarantine is an example of subordinating the wishes
of the individual to the needs of society. Civilian
physicians in these quarantine situations may need
to be involved in restricting the rights of individuals by placing the needs of society above the wishes
of the patient.
However, they disagree with requiring immunizations for the “good of the fighting force” for diseases “not spread from person to person.” If one
were to equate the military (the “fighting force”) to
society, their argument is valid—involuntarily treating an individual for a condition that cannot affect
society is substantively different from protecting
society from infectious disease. Soldiers’ not being
immunized can, however, affect both the military
and society. It can result in widespread loss of lives
within both.
In the military case to which the authors refer
(anthrax vaccination), the soldiers, the military, and
society can and should be protected. If the military
is unable to protect the society because a significant proportion of soldiers were incapacitated by
illness, the basic function of the armed forces has been
lost. If, as we agree, the society should be protected,
the analysis changes dramatically. To protect society,
it may be necessary for soldiers to take measures to
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
316
protect themselves or to increase their effectiveness
regardless of their individual views. Vaccination to
protect soldiers from a biologic weapon (inhalation
anthrax) is an example of society’s appropriately requiring soldiers to take a measure that should help
protect them during combat.
Battlefield Psychiatric Triage
Sidel and Levy believe that when soldiers have
combat fatigue, military doctors should do what is
best for soldiers. They could. This would involve
their sending such soldiers back from the front or
possibly to the United States. If they did this these
soldiers would remain alive because they would not
be reexposed to the risk of dying during combat at
the front. This is true, however, of every soldier. If
relieved from combat duty, every soldier would
then escape harm’s way.
Their analysis of battlefield psychiatric triage is
flawed significantly. They ignore the reality that if
military physicians relieve soldiers who experience
combat fatigue from further combat duty, there is
great risk that innumerable other soldiers, consciously or unconsciously, will also develop combat fatigue and, thus, follow suit so that they, too,
can escape the risk of death. Unless Sidel and Levy
are willing to accept an enemy’s prevailing as a result of this, they can’t argue logically that military
physicians should allow this risk. 88,89 Military physicians have no choice but to give these soldiers the
expectation that they will return to combat. This
may be extremely difficult psychologically for many
military doctors because it requires them to be coercive. Their doing this, however, also concomitantly reduces soldiers’ risk of having greater subsequent psychiatric morbidity because of survivor
guilt. Thus, if these soldiers survive combat, they
should benefit.
Military doctors know that if they allow stressed
soldiers to escape combat there is this extraordinary
risk of opening up the floodgates to other soldiers
experiencing combat fatigue. These doctors also
know that if these soldiers return to duty and survive, their likelihood of developing worse symptoms due to survivor guilt will be reduced. Both of
these awarenesses may help reduce the traumatizing effect on themselves of their having to coerce
soldiers in this manner. This shows how military
careproviders having an answer to Sidel and Levy’s
arguments may help them retain their sense that
they are acting with moral integrity. It may also reduce the potential emotional turmoil of their having
to act in exceptional ways. They, like the soldiers
they must send back to the front, are also experiencing additional emotional turmoil for the sake of
society. Having this knowledge may, in fact, rightly
result in their believing that they are taking not only
a permissible but also the highest moral road that
they could take.
Failing to Provide Care to Others
Sidel and Levy contend that military doctors
must be informed of their obligations under international conventions and then meet these obligations. They are right. Prisoners of war (POWs) are,
for example, no longer enemies but merely humans.
The Geneva Conventions do not permit military
physicians to treat their own soldiers first and later
treat POWs if POWs have more severe injuries. They
can’t do this even when treating their own soldiers
first would further their own military’s mission. Yet,
violating this obligation to treat POWs equally is
precisely what many military doctors now state
they would do. 90
Sidel and Levy also contend that military doctors should treat civilians almost equally. This may
be ethically warranted, but it is not required of US
military physicians under international law because
the United States has not agreed to this aspect of
the conventions. 91,92 The United States would not
agree to subscribe to do what in reality it anticipated might prove unfeasible or it might be unwilling to do: to provide sufficient medical resources
in another land to offer US soldiers, POWs, and civilians equal treatment.
It could be argued, as Sidel and Levy imply, that
all should be treated according to their need on the
ground of justice. This would treat all patients—
soldiers, POWs, and civilians—equally. This would
mean, however, that if resources were inadequate
to treat all these patients’ major medical needs, large
numbers of injured US soldiers who otherwise
could be treated would not be. They would remain
untreated, at least for some time, and possibly experience permanent morbidity or even die. This
could undermine soldiers’ morale and possibly affect the likelihood of their achieving victory. Their
morale also could be adversely affected when military physicians treat POWs equally. Among the reasons why military physicians must treat POWs
equally is the fact that if US soldiers are captured,
they can only expect enemies to treat them equally
if they will do this themselves. This rationale does
not apply to civilians.
Treating soldiers, POWs, and civilians equally
could, in addition, undermine the present implicit
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
317
promise made to all soldiers to give them the best
medical care possible. If the United States agreed
to this and as a result, US soldiers would be more
likely to sometimes go without care or without care
for a longer period of time, this promise made implicitly now would be changed, eliminating this
value as an important morale concern.
Sidel and Levy contend (and military doctors
themselves state90) that although military doctors
are taught to treat POWs and their own soldiers
equally, this training knowledge has had inadequate
effect. Here, then, is another instance in which the
argument for a new structure that would lead to a
better ethical result is exceptionally strong. Military
doctors not treating POWs equally could, for example, be made a criminal offense, resulting in such
physicians facing court-martial. Further, military
doctors could be required also to report others who
do not treat POWs equally, just as civilian doctors
must report child abuse. This example is not just
the strongest case Sidel and Levy make for structural change; it is the strongest case for its being
needed now.
Using Medicine as a Weapon
Using the example of Dr. Howard Levy, Sidel and
Levy declare that military physicians should not use
their medical skills to exploit civilians in occupied
territory to win wars by winning over these patients’
minds and hearts in this way. There is, perhaps,
widespread ethical agreement among ethicists, if
not civilians, on this point. 93 Ethicists particularly
are likely to perceive and be concerned that military physicians not use their medical skills for political purposes to further military goals. This is
for two main reasons. First, military physicians
doing this exploits these individuals’ vulnerability
and risks using them primarily as means to the
military’s ends. Ethically, using persons in this way
is generally prohibited. Second, it is implausible
that their doing this will alter the outcome of a war.
However, military physicians can treat patients in
occupied territories as ends in themselves. They could
treat them, for example, on the basis of their most
urgent medical needs. This would be not only
nonexploitative and ethically permissible, but ethically praiseworthy. Still, some winning of these civilians’ hearts could occur. This ground for military
physicians treating civilians could, then, be misused.
Here, as Sidel and Levy suggest, a structure might
be warranted to prevent this. For example, a neutral body could be established to insure that medical care is delivered under these circumstances on
the basis of patients’ needs as opposed to what
might be most politically successful in winning over
the hearts and minds of the people. For instance,
dramatic treatments such as plastic surgery, which
was carried out primarily for this political purpose
during the Vietnam conflict, might be precluded. 94
Torture
Sidel and Levy argue that military doctors should
not only not participate in torture but should be required to report it. They are right. 49,95–97 There are a
range of such abuses possible. This range includes
giving succinyl chloride to paralyze prisoners’
breathing at one extreme and withholding medical
care or food and water at the other. 98 Some still are
allowed. During interrogations, for example, water
may be withheld routinely. Prisoners might be threatened with torture that is actually prohibited, but the
prisoners wouldn’t know that. The conventions are
clear. Psychological torture (even by threatening to
use physical torture) is absolutely prohibited. 96
What if, however, with the use of torture hundreds of thousands of lives could be saved? This
might, for example, be the outcome from an airbased anthrax attack. Again, that torture would
prevent this would be highly speculative. Thus, although the value of saving so many persons’ lives
is self-evidently important, unless the most exceptional circumstances can be proven to exist, this is
universally proscribed. At a certain point, if any
means can be used to save a society, the values to
be preserved are no longer worth fighting for. For
this same reason, even if most exceptional and extenuating circumstances can be proven, this may not
be enough to morally justify any kind of torture. 96
It may presently be unclear, however, whether
ethically all such abuses should be absolutely precluded as they have been in the past. According to
one view, there is no new reason the previous blanket prohibition should be changed. Conversely,
some may argue that terrorists pose a risk now that
is unprecedented. Terrorists, for example, are not
bound by inherent ethical limitations, are dispersed
globally, and have access to biological and chemical weaponry. Still, the risk may not differ qualitatively, or perhaps even quantitatively, from prior
risks, such as that posed by the genocidal policies
of Nazi Germany.
If torture still should be precluded absolutely,
this is another instance in which, as Sidel and Levy
contend, structures could bring about far better
moral outcomes. As already illustrated most
strongly in regard to POWs, they could help insure
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
318
that physical and mental torture doesn’t occur. Even
if there is some new ground that could permit the
use of torture to some degree when it seems certain
this could save hundreds of thousands of persons’
lives, new structures still should be necessary to
insure that the prerequisite extenuating circumstances are met.
Moral Protest
Sidel and Levy contend that military doctors
should be allowed to protest. Military doctors, as
all soldiers, can and should refuse to carry out illegal or immoral orders. 99,100 This is established in
military law. Soldiers, unlike civilians, however,
should also have to sacrifice certain options. If this
were not the case, the effectiveness of the military
endeavors could be fundamentally undermined. 101,102
This could result in catastrophe. Military physicians,
as all soldiers, can and should express their moral
convictions, first through official channels. Later, it
may make sense for them to risk court-martial. 99
Their ultimate protection lies within civilian courts.
There are two critical points about which Sidel
and Levy may be mistaken. First, there is no reason
military physicians should be allowed to protest
more than other soldiers. Although they have their
medical obligations, all persons have personal beliefs that may warrant greater allegiance. Second,
and built upon this, military physicians, like all
soldiers, may rightfully be limited in the freedom
they have to protest for much the same kind of reason military physicians must treat soldiers with
battle fatigue with three hots and a cot. If soldiers
were permitted to protest in whatever way and
whenever they want, once some did, others might
follow suit in droves. As with combat fatigue, consciously or unconsciously, they might do this for
secondary gains. This could result in the military’s
failing and enemies then being able to prevail.
They cite as an example here the experience of
Dr. Yolanda Huet-Vaughn. She refused to serve in
a specific war on the ground that this would violate her moral conscience. 101 Her personal conviction, I believe, was wholly sincere. (In fact, at my
invitation she addressed the medical students taking their required course in military medical ethics
at the Uniformed Services University for the Health
Sciences and discussed with them her views and
reasons for her refusal.) But the point here that Sidel
and Levy overlook is that, due to reality-based limitations, it may be that whether or not she was sincere can’t matter. Why? It would no doubt be morally right to allow all those with sincere objections
to follow their beliefs. Yet, allowing this would open
the door to all doctors and soldiers who decided
they wanted to get out of the military to do so, regardless of obligations they have incurred. If the
military has invested substantial resources in physicians’ education or training, physicians in great
numbers could, having reaped these benefits, then
assert that they can no longer serve on the basis of
their moral conscience. This is a situation in which
there are limited options. Because there is no way
of determining who has genuine moral scruples
from who does not, there are only two options:
Leave the system open to being exploited or leave
some soldiers to suffer adverse consequences despite their having genuine moral convictions.
Still, the kind of structure Sidel and Levy suggest is needed here may play a most important role.
Military physicians’, as well as soldiers’, right to
protest publicly and to respond on the basis of their
moral conscience should be impartially assessed.
Although civilian courts may do this in time and in
some cases, this ultimate remedy may be too infrequently offered and difficult to achieve to fairly treat
military doctors and other soldiers who are protesting. A structure allowing more immediate and accessible impartial review may improve this.
A perhaps greater problem a new structure may
help correct is the risk that those military persons
judging the protesting of military physicians will
be biased. This is a concern Sidel and Levy raise in
regard to many contexts that is entirely valid. A
more impartial body with more civilians to assess
these cases could be optimal. Yet, this being an improvement presupposes that civilians will indeed
be more impartial, but this may not at all be the
case. Civilians denied Huet-Vaughn, for example,
the right to continue to practice medicine though
all evidence indicated that she was not only competent but also exceptionally committed to her patients. Civilians’ impartiality may appear to be a
better solution than it might actually be. Again, both
military physicians’ and other soldiers’ interests
may be best met in this regard also by being as fully
informed as possible, prior to entering the service,
of the consequences they could confront. As discussed previously, structures might be established
to insure that this occurs.
Overview
Sidel and Levy have compiled a list of what they
believe are wrongs that have occurred and may continue to occur in military medicine. They believe
the structures allowing these wrongs should be
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
319
changed. Some of these changes have been made
already. Others can and should be. Since September 11th, 2001, there are heightened concerns and
thus ethically, the principles underlying military
medical practice may or may not be the same.
Two general principles, however, still prevail.
First, there are some practices that should still be
carried out absolutely. Prisoners of war should, for
example, be treated equally. Captured enemies
probably should not be physically or mentally tortured to any extent. Otherwise, the notion underlying international conventions that war, though horrible, can be humanized to a limited but significant
extent, must be discarded. Second, there are some
compromises that must be made, both by soldiers
and the citizenry at large. These compromises have
been and always will be necessary for countries to
prevail when they fight just wars. An example given
here is requiring soldiers to take agents to help protect them from the effects of biological and chemical weaponry.
Making these sacrifices may be painful. An example involving military physicians is their having to endure the pain of giving highly distressed
soldiers three hots and a cot and sending them back
to duty where they may die. Military physicians
should, however, find this pain offset, at least to
some extent, by the pride they should rightfully feel
as a result of what they do. The challenges Sidel
and Levy offer and the responses such as those I
have offered here are intended to further ethical
thinking regarding military medicine. In addition,
it is hoped that this discussion will benefit military
physicians by giving them a more rational basis for
feeling this pride. This, again, is a goal of this entire textbook, as well.
What, then, is to be said of Sidel and Levy’s overall argument that it is unethical for physicians to
serve in the military as doctors and soldiers at the
same time? If they are not right, why not, and why,
in light of their claim, should military physicians
still feel immense pride?
This same claim was made and hotly debated a
century and a half ago when it was proposed that
neutral volunteer careproviders aid the sick and
wounded during war. One person speaking for this
practice stated, “We have in view but one object,
and that is: the neutrality of ambulances and sanitary personnel of belligerent armies. This is all. We
ask nothing more than this.”103(p33)
However, at the International Congress of Geneva
of August 1864 it was unanimously determined that
this would not occur. The grounds for this decision
were, however, ethically, far from compelling. It was
thought that leaving the care of soldiers of both
sides to “volunteers not subject to military control”
would “very possibly lead to incessant practical
difficulties in field hospital administration” and to
“disputes and embarrassments with foreigners.”104(p6)
Are there, then, stronger arguments for or against
this neutrality now?
Sidel and Levy’s major basis for wanting neutrality is now, as it was then, that military physicians cannot be sufficiently unbiased because of the
tendency to identify with the unit and the mission.
This, too, has been acknowledged by others not only
in past but recent times. Daniels gives, for instance,
this example involving a military psychiatrist. He
asked him about the conflict of sending soldiers
back to possible death. The psychiatrist said, “‘No,
you can’t put that in the paper, you must call it arduous duty.’”85(p4)
Examples involving POWs show unequivocally
that unethical practices can occur as a result of
overidentification. Gordon Livingston, a West Point
graduate who served in Vietnam as a military physician, states, “one night when [wounded Vietcong
and North Vietnamese were brought to his regimental command post for questioning] I protested to
my commanding officer that a wounded soldier
might die if he were not promptly evacuated, I was
told to ‘just keep him alive for a few minutes so we
can question him. After that he can die; it doesn’t
matter to me.’”98(p268) Carter’s findings90 regarding
the sizable percentage of US physicians in the Persian Gulf War who said they would treat POWs
unequally suggest a fearful possibility that given
this same response, they would comply.
Clearly, physicians must treat soldiers during
combat. Were they to not do this, this would involve
society’s violating soldiers’ dignity unconscionably
because the society would be using and regarding
soldiers solely as means, not ends. Would, however,
rendering physicians neutral, as Sidel and Levy
claim, benefit soldiers and particularly others to the
extent that this would be preferable? If the kinds of
unethical practices Sidel and Levy describe are common, as opposed to the exception, it is plausible that
they are right. Most who have been in the military
would, however, argue adamantly that this is not
the case. (See, for example, the response by Navy
Commander Dominick R. Rascona, himself a physician, that follows this discussion.) They would
claim that soldiers trust and rely greatly on military physicians because they share both common
goals and personal sacrifice.
A study of military psychiatrists supports this.
Seventy-four percent said that they believed that
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
320
limitations regarding confidentiality in the military
had little or no effect on their ability to treat patients. 105 It is possible these psychiatrists saw little
or no effect because they, like the psychiatrist interviewed by Daniels, were biased, but the high
percentage of psychiatrists reporting this lack of
effect make this possibility less plausible.
Further, most would claim also that notwithstanding Carter’s findings, military physicians above all
others insist on giving POWs and civilians in occupied territories optimal care. The example given earlier in which Dr. Livingston refused to follow his
commander’s instructions is such a case. (Livingston,
too, has been a guest speaker to the second-year medical students in the Ethics Course each year for the past
several years at the Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences (USUHS). He has emphasized not
only that military physicians can serve this unique
role of enforcing the highest vision of medical practice during combat, but the importance that they do
so.) I have found that military physicians have been
the ones to contact me on several occasions, not because they were allied with military interests but to
gain advice on protecting the interests of their patients.
These patients have been both allied soldiers as well
as wounded enemy prisoners of war. For example, I
recently received a call from a military physician who
was concerned that Taliban forces now held as prisoners receive equal rights to confidentiality during
physician interviews as other patients, to respect their
dignity and the sanctity of the patient–physician relationship as well as benefiting from treatment to the
maximal degree that they could.
Dr. Howard Levy, whom Sidel and Levy mention,
is another example. He objected to the military’s using medical care as a means of pursuing military
goals. Subsequent to his raising this concern, others have come to recognize the importance of military physicians not exploiting the vulnerability of
patients in occupied territory for political or military purposes. 93,94
When physicians serve in the military, they bring
with them such medical tenets as those in the
Hippocratic Oath that give highest regard to patient
interests. Whether the “physician first, soldier second”
general paradigm presented in the concluding
chapter of this text is or is not ultimately theoretically justifiable, as a matter of practice this paradigm
is followed by most military physicians unless they
encounter the extenuating circumstances requiring
that priorities be given first to military necessity. With
the exception of situations involving military necessity, military physicians, in the same manner as HuetVaughn, Livingston, Howard Levy, and even Sidel and
Levy actually fight for soldiers’ and others’ [civilians
and POW’s] rights and interests as patients. Military
physicians are the leading proponents of both the
highest moral roads and needed ethical change.
Ultimately the necessity for military physicians
to be members of their own units is their critical
role in carrying out the military mission. As discussed throughout this textbook, military physicians must carry out such unusual and personally
agonizing tasks as military medical triage, treating
soldiers with combat fatigue with three hots and a
cot, and insisting they take anthrax vaccinations if
wars are to be won. Wars must be won if our country (and possibly many or even all others) is to be
protected from unthinkable outcomes, as the events
on September 11th most recently illustrated. These
recent terrorist attacks in the United States reaffirm
this reality. Enemies may use any and all means to
harm other nations and persons they wish to destroy. These attacks should remind us that the
United States and other countries are all vulnerable.
All countries need the best protection that could
plausibly be offered.
This best protection unequivocally requires
armed forces having military physicians committed to doing what is required to secure victory. Regardless of whom we should protect in the future,
ourselves or vulnerable persons in other countries,
to most protect ourselves and others, we need the
exact opposite of what Sidel and Levy prescribe. As
opposed to needing neutral physicians, we need
military physicians who can and do identify as
closely as possible with the military so that they,
too, can carry out the vital part they play in meeting the needs of the mission.
[Edmund G. Howe, MD, JD]
THE MORAL OBLIGATION OF UNITED STATES MILITARY MEDICAL SERVICE
The profession of the United States military
medical officer is one of moral necessity, regardless
of the exigencies or conflicts such an individual
must endure. Intrinsic to this argument is an assumption of just war. This extremely important
point—upon which all others to follow base their
ethical validity—is a contentious and difficult one.
Skeptics of United States foreign policy may therefore be unconvinced regarding the ethics of US military medical service. These skeptics will remain
unconvinced regardless, but countering such criticism is beyond the scope of this essay. (Chapter 8,
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
321
Just War Doctrine and the International Law of War,
discusses the assumption of just war in detail.)
The Mandate of the Military Physician
Military medical service in the United States is
ethically sound based upon the following simple
predicate: If American democracy can be shown to
be ethically sound, so must be the assumption of
necessary duties taken up in its defense. This would
include the general notion of military medical service.
No doubt physicians participating in such service
can be expected to face ethical difficulties, perhaps
even true moral hazard—ethical conduct within the
“total system” of the military may indeed be difficult. But claims that the mere shunning of such service is somehow superior to performing it must be
shown to lack moral credibility.
The overriding principle of military service in the
United States is to support and defend its Constitution, a set of values purporting freedom and dignity
for all people. These values are generally accepted
as fundamentally moral, something that all military
officers, enlisted personnel, and military medical
personnel must be assumed to know. Regardless of
the importance of obedience to command structure,
people do not voluntarily join the US military in
order to obey orders. They obey lawful orders to
preserve a society based on the Constitution. Medical personnel may indeed be viewed as integral to
the capabilities and effectiveness of military power,
but this military power will exist with them or without them, as it did for the centuries before medicine
was, in any meaningful way, effective. I submit that
the vast majority of American military medical officers enter the service with this knowledge and in
fact dedicate themselves initially to nothing more
than the desire to minimize harm to their countrymen who will become potential and actual military
patients.
Imperative for a Prepared Medical Officer
Following from the doctrine of just war, if there
can ever be just and ethical soldiers, it follows that
there not only can but also must be just and ethical
military physicians. If soldiers of a just war are to
be cared for in an optimum manner, then their physicians must meet the same levels of competency
as their military commanders. Such competency
cannot be expected from civilians (“amateurs,” to
quote Madden and Carter in Chapter 10, PhysicianSoldier: A Moral Profession) when it comes to the
unique contingencies of modern warfare. Anything
short of such competency should be considered
egregiously unfair to all soldiers (especially those
first into battle) whose lives would be unnecessarily lost on the learning curve of an ill-prepared military medical system. Such incompetence should
therefore be considered unethical and unacceptable.
Details of how the US military should actually accomplish the legitimate goal of maintaining an ethical permanent military medical officer corps likely
raises a second set of concerns, but the principle
that such a corps must exist in some form is logical.
Sidel and Levy state that all-out war is “extremely unlikely for a country like the United
States,” (and therefore) “to subordinate the rights
of patients and the responsibilities of physicians to
prepare for such an improbable event is unwise and
unnecessary.” Can such a position be logically countered? The degree of readiness required, desired,
or attainable during peacetime may be debated, but
one situation will obtain: either a country will or
will not be prepared at the time it is threatened or
attacked.
Regardless of one’s world view, it should be recognized and understood that warfare, whenever it
occurs, represents a breakdown of civil society. Although international codes such as those of
Nuremberg and Geneva may attenuate some of the
horrors of war, they do nothing to prevent it. When
the United States or any other purportedly good
nation goes to war, it must be assumed that no good
path is being taken, only one that has been decided
upon as the lesser of evils. When this regrettable
circumstance obtains, military medical officers, assuming personal risk as well as moral hazard to
lessen overall harm, act not only ethically but also
nobly. They answer a call to legitimate duty. Their
role is simply to lessen harm that will otherwise occur, with or without their participation. The recognition that someone will be called or required to
answer this call to duty cannot be overemphasized.
Unless the entire society embraces complete pacifism,
warfare, and especially defensive warfare, is not an
optional activity. Physicians will need to act. Society
should expect them to be prepared and ready.
The Moral Nature of Military Medicine
Three chapters of this textbook directly address the
moral nature of medical practice within the modern
American military (Chapter 10, Physician-Soldier:
A Moral Profession; Chapter 11, Physician-Soldier: A
Moral Dilemma?; and Chapter 12, Mixed Agency
in Military Medicine: Ethical Roles in Conflict). In
Chapter 10, Madden and Carter most directly adMilitary Medical Ethics, Volume 1
322
dress the moral nature of medical service as a military officer of the United States. My argument, however, proceeds further, to suggest that such service
is even mandatory. Madden and Carter say, “Without security neither individuals nor their society can
benefit from the profession of medicine.” If this is
true, then American medical professionals have not
only the choice to serve ethically but also the duty
to do so if they are to truly serve humanity as they
profess is their ethos. There is a moral imperative
for such service in modern society. To develop this
concept, I shall briefly review the central arguments
of Chapters 10, 11, and 12, which may be viewed
respectively as justifying, disallowing, and rationalizing or “operation-alizing” the ethical basis of military medicine. I will then discuss legitimate duty.
Differing Views of the Ethical Basis of Military
Medicine
Chapters 10 and 11 actually consider the possibility that medical practice within the United States
armed forces is inherently unethical. Drs. Sidel and
Levy come to this conclusion, supporting their argument with interpretations of the manner in which
a number of specific ethical dilemmas were resolved
in the United States in the latter part of the 20th
century. Drs. Madden and Carter provide a direct
counterpoise. By exploring the inherent ethos of the
professions of arms and medicine, they find that
not only are the two not in inherent conflict, but
that they are in fact very similar. Both are composed
of healers and protectors nobly seeking to diminish human suffering. Importantly implicit in their
argument for the inherent morality of military medical service, however, is the prerequisite of just war.
Their argument cannot, therefore, be applied to all
military medical officers under all circumstances.
In Chapter 12, Dr. Howe provides an analysis and
explication of the nuances and subtleties of mixedagency. Central to his analysis is the legitimization
of “role-specific ethics.” With some understatement,
though, he seems to imbue the modern American
military medical officer with a sense of discretion
that might be contested by senior leadership and
policy makers. He appears to conclude that the
moral integrity of practicing military clinicians is
preserved because many of the expressed policies
of the US armed forces are in fact paper tigers, not
really expected to be followed by its doctors.
Sidel and Levy claim a contradiction between the
overriding ethical principles of medical practice and
military service. Their argument in favor of ethical
incompatibility identifies the overriding ethical
principles of military service as “concern for the
effective function of the fighting force” and “obedience to command structure.” In a narrow sense
this is true, but obedience to command structure is
more appropriately considered a logical requisite
for military effectiveness, just as sterile technique
is a logical requisite for safe surgical operations.
However, it should be noted that “obedience to
command structure” in the sense of “absolute obedience in the armed forces of the United States”
applies only to lawful orders. “Absolute obedience”
per se is not an overriding principle of American
military service. On the contrary, obedience to questionable orders is more likely than not to bring an
officer trouble, especially if such obedience conflicts
with international law as found in the Geneva Conventions (for example, wanton destruction or
breaching human rights of prisoners).
The Necessity of Military Medicine
The role of the United States military medical
officer arises from necessity. One does not require
a sophisticated understanding of history to acknowledge that the world is neither a naturally fair
nor abiding place. Political power vacuums and lack
of good government can lead to the emergence of
ruthlessness and violence. Despite their own subsequent qualification, Sidel and Levy’s reference to
a fantasy end to warfare promoted by broad refusal
of the medical community to “support war efforts”
must be criticized for its fundamental naiveté. Warfare was waged for century upon century without
medical support of any meaningful effectiveness.
History has shown no proclivity toward attenuation or avoidance of war on account of a belligerent’s
lack of intrinsic medical capability.
This is not to criticize Sidel’s, Levy’s, or any other
physician’s work toward the abolition of war—such
work as citizens and as members of the human family is fitting and commendable. However, the claim
of an ethical superiority of such work from physicians as physicians must be considered suspect, as
though any one group could claim ethical superiority. If one were to heed or value one group over
another, why not the mothers who provide the soldiers and the victims? Or the architects who provide the buildings that are destroyed? The children
who become parentless? The teenagers who become
emotionally flat (ie, flat affect) or infected with hatred? Likewise, what of the ethical roles of arms
manufacturers and their financial backers, both direct and indirect? The suffering of humanity is
broadly painted by the brush of war; all humans
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
323
are involved regardless of their particular societal
skills. That the physician has a special rank or sanctified role in the important work of war prevention
is unconvincing.
In Chapter 10, Madden and Carter certainly recognize the necessity of military medical service.
However, their claim that “the physician, as a citizen, has the same rights and obligations to act in
the defense of society as does any other member of
society,” appears to be qualified to time of war. Although they clearly defend the lifelong dedication
to mastering the complex set of skills required by
the professional soldier (“war simply became too
complicated for amateurs”), they do not sufficiently
defend medical military service during peacetime.
Such service is justified for the same reasons, and
its fundamental morality must therefore be emphasized. The morality of such service as an assumption of legitimate duty has been insufficiently addressed. The main reason Sidel, Levy, and others
reach either erroneous or overly broad conclusions
that would seem to preclude ethical military medical practice, is because they overlook or perhaps
even reject the virtue of duty.
The Ethical Nonparticipant: Physicians’
Dubious Role in Preventing Warfare
Many authors apparently cite a “special responsibility” of healthcare professionals, physicians in
particular, to attempt to prevent injury and death.
The organization Physicians for Social Responsibility, for example, is chartered on the principle that
physicians should take specific actions to prevent
nuclear war. Sidel and Levy admit, however, that
even consummation of their fantasy of global refusal for all military medical service would still not
likely result in the cessation of war. What condition then (because ethical behavior does require
some sort of action or specific inaction) is more
likely to ameliorate the harm of war: a professional
medical corps that has been thoroughly trained regarding the dilemmas it might face and has been
given time to reflect and prepare, or an ad hoc muster of civilian physicians haphazardly collected at
the time of conflict? If medical ethics in general are
to be viewed as anything beyond the vague negative
charge to do no harm, is not the most important
corollary that, given harm, physicians are morally
compelled to act to minimize it? Given that destruction, killing, and moral hazards associated with
breaching the autonomous rights of soldiers as patients are going to occur with or without intervention
by medical officers, is it in any way moral to leave
whatever medical work there is to be done to unprepared physicians who have no concept of military training, priority, and necessity?
Viewed another way, assuming there is an ethical superiority among physicians who would consider nonparticipation in military medicine, how
ethical is their withholding their service from a system so badly in their need? Given the exigency of
war and assuming that only just wars will be fought,
such “opting out” in favor of personal moral conscience is, at best, a shirking of legitimate duty. Indeed, if physicians as a group do have any sort of
“special responsibility” (which is itself a debatable
issue), and if soldiers are indeed a “disenfranchised
group,” what ethical basis supports withholding
care from individuals who arguably need it most?
Whether or not military medicine can or should
provide all aspects of the care of soldiers is a large
issue. Certainly much of this care, especially for
combat soldiers, must come from within the military. Can the military meet the medical needs of its
service men and women in an ethical manner? The
military’s medical school, the Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, was among the first in the nation to institute
a full semester course devoted to ethics. This course,
now well over 20 years old, introduces and invites
discussion over all aspects of medical ethics, especially those related to combat and the breaching of
human rights. The majority of today’s military
medical officers, however, are educated in civilian
universities. One could argue that this majority, which
has not had the basics of their medical or ethical training within the military, may indeed be another moral
strength of the system. It is a strength because it ensures that the medical corps of the military reflects
the diverse values of the society that the military
serves. I would add that the simple existence of this
addresses at least one lament of those who criticize
the honorable and necessary principle of maintaining a uniformed corps of physicians.
Areas of Concern
Sidel and Levy of course serve the useful and
necessary function of reflecting light onto difficult
and important issues. They point out that many
ethical conflicts, or “opportunities for moral hazard,” arise between the humanistic values of medicine and the operational requirements of military
operations. The issues they raise are valid to consider, including the possibility that military medical service is fundamentally immoral. Significant
consideration is therefore due what I consider Sidel
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
324
and Levy’s most legitimate concerns: the ethical issues that may subtend from a military medical
officer’s tendency toward unit identification and
those that arise from “voluntary obligation.”
Unit Identification
Unit identification is the linchpin of military camaraderie and effectiveness. Such identification is
supported by all branches of the military and appears to have increased in recent years. The Navy,
for example, awards physicians serving with surface ships a uniform insignia device very similar to
the one worn by line surface warfare officers after
appropriate qualifications are met. One must attempt to distinguish between the normal, natural,
and healthy identification an individual medical
officer (MO) can be expected to make with other
individuals with whom he serves, and the possibly
dangerous (unethical, according to Sidel and Levy)
overidentification the MO may develop toward
these same colleagues or the actual military mission of the unit with which he serves. This must be
admitted to be a fine distinction. Bonding with individuals with whom one goes into harm’s way and
upon whose competencies one’s life depends may
be expected to become strong. The MO, however,
faces moral hazard when he too thoroughly identifies with either his “band of brothers” or the mission. Sidel and Levy’s “solution,” however, that
physicians should avoid military service on the
basis of this moral hazard, is not a solution at all.
Although correctly identifying that significant
moral hazard exists within military medical practice, they rather ironically provide an example that
sufficiently contradicts their conclusion (that military medical service is unethical). Acknowledging
that “[t]he field commander may not understand
the perspective or the needs of the health professional or may not have time to evaluate the ethical
dilemma the health professional faces,” they continue to explain that the “total institutional” nature
of the military coupled with such an inadequate
moral assessment by the field commander may result in limiting moral action by subordinate physicians. This is far from being a case against ethical
military medical service. Even if military medical
service could be found to be ethically inferior to
some other ideal, given the grim reality that warfare occurs, the legitimate ethical demand to lessen
harm requires that this form of service exist. The
adequate preparation required to fulfill the ethical
obligation of competency then requires a permanent,
dedicated, trained, and ready military medical corps.
Even conscripted soldiers should likely be afforded
this same degree of respectful treatment; volunteers
enticed to duty in modern America are arguably so
entitled with even greater ethical validity.
Voluntary Obligation
The ethics of the manner in which individual
medical officers are recruited and maintained in the
United States military does not appear to be resolved. This is, in this author’s opinion, a symptom
of the weak ethics upon which an all-volunteer force
is based in the first place. Currently, almost all medical officers enter military medical service on some
sort of scholarship that provides education for a
delimited time of service. In fact, this is a system of
indentured servitude because at no time may a military physician choose to “opt out” and repay the
government in any way other than military service.
Faced with requisite career steps for advancement
and promotion, the notion of obedience required
of all members of the armed forces and discussed
by Madden and Carter (Chapter 10) cannot be overemphasized. Underappreciation of this essential of
military service has apparently been overlooked by
some modern officers who have clashed with their
leadership regarding legal orders. This is not to say
that all medical officers are ethically compelled to
do everything they are ordered to do if, on a caseby-case basis, they feel strongly enough to oppose
their leaders, especially during peacetime. They
simply must be prepared to deal with the consequences, including the possibility of jail or dishonorable discharge or both. This is true, however, of
all military officers. The “special status” ascribed
to physicians in this capacity is specious. Of note it
must be recognized that in wartime the “opting out”
of a physician who is an integral part of a military
force may significantly detract from the safety and
well-being of that force and its fighting ability. Such
behavior during wartime should therefore be expected to be punished severely. Attention to the
entire matter of the “voluntary obligation” should
be an area for further study.
Summary
Fundamental moral principles centered around
the fulfillment of legitimate duty refute the main
conclusion by Sidel and Levy that military medical
service in the United States in 2002 is inherently
unethical. I agree with the importance of the issues
these authors raise, but their conclusion that the
shunning of such duty is moral is unsound. Their
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
325
contention that apparent conflicts are insurmountable or are, in fact, resolved unethically in modern
America is equally unsound. This is discussed in
detail by Dr. Howe.
Society labels the deaths of soldiers in the endeavor of war as the supreme manifestation of duty,
honor, and sacrifice. Warfare involves the purposeful destruction of human endeavor, natural resources, and previously healthy, often innocent,
lives. What is important ethically is that the societal and military ethics tolerating such abhorrent
behavior be correct and follow those of a just war
doctrine. The notion that medical ethics may be
somehow superior to (all) others, including just war
doctrine, would seem to be at the heart of the problem of the legitimacy of military medicine. Overlooked by a notion of the superiority of medical ethics is the virtue of legitimate duty. If the cause is
just and the society supports it, then some members of the society will serve as soldiers and some
doctors will serve as medical officers. It is not a
question of if; it is only a question of who will subject themselves to the burden of this service.
[Dominick R. Rascona, MD, FACP, FCCP]
REFERENCES
1.
Bellamy RF. Conserve the fighting strength. Mil Med. 1988;153(4):185–187.
2.
Letterman J. Medical Recollections of the Army of the Potomac. New York: D. Appleton; 1866: 100. Quoted by:
Rubenstein DA. Health service support and the principles of war. Mil Med. 1988;153(3):145–146.
3.
Beecher HK. Research and the Individual: Human Studies. Boston: Little, Brown; 1970: 209–210.
4.
Swan KG, Swan KG Jr. Triage: The past revisited. Mil Med. 1996;161(8):448–452.
5.
Janousek JT, Jackson DE, DeLorenzo RA, Coppola M. Mass casualty triage knowledge of military medical personnel. Mil Med. 1999;164(5):332–335.
6.
Bordes PA, Finan JL, Hochstim JR, McFann HH, Schwartz SG. Desert Rock I: A Psychological Study of Troop Reactions to an Atomic Explosion. Washington, DC: Human Resources Research Office, George Washington University. TR-1. February 1953.
7.
Desert Rock IV: Reactions of an Armored Infantry Battalion to an Atomic Bomb Maneuver. Washington, DC: Human
Resources Research Office, George Washington University. TR-2. August 1953.
8.
Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Final Report. Washington, DC: GPO; 1995.
9.
Pechura CM, Rall DM. Veterans at Risk: The Health Effects of Mustard Gas and Lewisite. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press; 1993.
10.
Annas GJ. Changing the consent rules for Desert Storm. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(11):770–773.
11.
Annas GJ. Protecting soldiers from friendly fire: The consent requirement for using investigational drugs and
vaccines in combat. Am J Law Med. 1998;24(2–3):245–260.
12.
Howe EG, Martin ED. Treating the troops. Hastings Cent Rep. 1991;21(2):21–24.
13.
21 CFR Part 50—Protection of Human Subjects; Section 23—Exception From General Requirements. US Food
and Drug Administration. 27 January 1981, as amended 21 December 1990. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
oc/ohrt/irbs/appendixb.html. Accessed: 7 September 2001.
14.
Lamiell JM, Grabenstein JD, Vander Hamm DG. Review of the 1995 Food and Drug Administration/National
Institutes of Health public forum on informed consent in clinical research conducted in emergency circumstances. Mil Med. 1995;160(12):599–603.
15.
Symposium: In case of emergency: No need for consent. Hastings Cent Rep. January–February, 1997.
16.
Auster SL. Confidentiality in military medicine. Mil Med. 1985;150(7):341–346.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
326
17.
Steinfels MO, Levin C, eds. Conference transcript: In the service of the state. The psychiatrist as double agent.
Hastings Cent Rep. 1978;8(2, Special Supplement): 8.
18.
Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses. 1997. Special Report, 31 October 1997. Available at: http://www.gwvi.ncr.gov/txreport.html #summary. Accessed 6 May 2002.
19.
Myers SL. 1997. US armed forces to be vaccinated against anthrax. New York Times. 16 December 1997:A1.
20.
Brachman PS, Gold H, Plotkin SA, et al. Field evaluation of a human anthrax vaccine. Am J Public Health.
1962;56:632–645.
21.
Turnbull PCB. Anthrax vaccines: Past, present, and future. Vaccine. 1991;9:533–539.
22.
Ivins B, Fellows P, Pitt L, et al. Experimental anthrax vaccines: Efficacy of adjuvants combined with protective
antigen against an aerosol Bacillus anthracis spore challenge in guinea pigs. Vaccine. 1995;13(18):1779–1784.
23.
United States Senate. Is Military Research Hazardous to Veterans’ Health? Lessons Spanning Half a Century. Washington, DC: US GPO; 1994.
24.
Ivins BE, Pitt ML, Fellows PF, et al. Comparative efficacy of experimental vaccine candidates against inhalation anthrax in rhesus macaques. Vaccine. 1998;16:1141–1148.
25.
Pomerantsev AF, Staritsin NA, Mockov YV, Martinin LI. Expression of cereolysine AB genes in Bacillus anthracis
vaccine strain ensures protection against experimental hemolytic anthrax infection. Vaccine. 1997;15(17–18):1846–
1850.
26.
Langmuir AD, Bregman DJ, Kurland LT, Nathanson N, Victor M. An epidemiologic and clinical evaluation of
Guillain-Barré syndrome reported in association with the administration of swine influenza vaccines. Am J
Epidemiol. 1984;119(6):841–879.
27.
Poser CM. Neurological complications of swine influenza vaccination. Acta Neurol Scand. 1982;66(4):413–431.
28.
Sloat B, Epstein K. Army misled troops who got vaccine in Bosnia. Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio). 25 January
1998:1A, 18A.
29.
Committee on Health Effects Associated with Exposures during the Gulf War. An Assessment of the Safety of the
Anthrax Vaccine [electronic resource]: A Letter Report. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 2000.
30.
Ginburg Y. Sailors refuse vaccine. Navy Times. 20 April 1998:3.
31.
Subcommittee on National Security, Veterans Affairs and International Relations, House Committee on Government Reform. The Department of Defense Anthrax Vaccine Immunization Program: Unproven Force Protection.
Washington DC: US GPO; 17 February 2000.
32.
Swann SW. Euthanasia on the battlefield. Mil Med. 1987;152(11):545–549.
33.
Geneva Conventions of 1949. In: Human Rights Documents: Compilation of Documents Pertaining to Human Rights.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1983.
34.
Vastyan EA. Warfare: I. Medicine and war. In: Reich WT, ed. Encyclopedia of Bioethics. 2nd ed. Vol. 4. New York:
Macmillan; 1978: 1695–1699.
35.
US Department of the Army. Treaties Governing Land Warfare. Washington, DC: DA Pamphlet; 1956. DA PAM 27-1.
36.
Declaration of Geneva. World Medical Association Handbook of Declarations. Geneva: World Medical Association; 1997.
37.
Bourne PG. Men, Stress, and Vietnam. Boston: Little, Brown; 1970.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
327
38.
Garfield RM, Neugut AI. The human consequences of war. In: Levy BS, Sidel VW. War and Public Health. New
York: Oxford University Press; 1997: 27–38.
39.
Plutarch. Lives. Vol. 2. Perin B, trans. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1914.
40.
Stacey J. The cover. JAMA. 1988;260(28):448.
41.
US Department of the Army. The Law of Land Warfare. Washington, DC: DA; 1956. Field Manual 27-10.
42.
US Department of the Army. The Medal of Honor of the United States Army. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1948.
43.
Bourne P. As cited in: Liberman R, Gold W, Sidel VW. Medical ethics and the military. New Physician. 1968;17:299–309.
44.
Langer E. The court-martial of Captain Levy: Medical ethics v. military law. Science. 1967;56:1346, 1349.
45.
Glasser I. Judgment at Fort Jackson: The court-martial of Captain Howard B. Levy. Law Transition Q. 1967;4:123–156.
46.
Rosebury T. Medical ethics and biological warfare. Perspect Biol Med. 1963;6:312–323.
47.
Sidel VW. Biological weapons research and physicians: Historical and ethical analysis. PSR Q. 1991;1:31–42.
48.
Cilasun U. Torture and the participation of doctors. J Med Ethics. 1991;17(suppl):21–22. Cited in Moskop JC. A
moral analysis of military medicine. Mil Med. 1998;163(2):76–79.
49.
Bloche MG. Uruguay’s military physicians: Cogs in a system of state terror. JAMA. 1986;225(20):2788–2793.
50.
Goffman E. Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates. New York: Doubleday, 1961.
51.
Greenberg J. Protesting tactics in West Bank, Israeli reservists refuse to serve. New York Times. 2 February 2002. A1.
52.
Vest J. Village Voice. March 16, 1999; 44(10): 55–59.
53.
Walzer M. Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument With Historical Illustrations. New York: Basic Books; 1977.
54.
Seabury P, Codevilla A. War: Ends and Means. New York: Basic Books; 1989.
55.
US Department of the Army. Conscientious Objection. Washington, DC: DA; 15 May 1998. Army Regulation 600-43.
56.
Blaustein M, Proctor WC. The active duty conscientious objector: A psychiatric-psychological evaluation. Mil
Med. 1977:142(8):619–621.
57.
Personal statement of Yolanda Huet-Vaughn, MD (a copy of which she gave to Victor Sidel, MD), that she read
aloud at her court-martial. January 1991.
58.
International Court of Justice Communiqué No. 96/3. July 8, 1996. The Hague, Netherlands.
59.
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on their Destruction (CWC). Available at: http://www.opcw.org. Accessed 28 January 2002.
60.
Federation of American Scientists. Available at: http://www.fas.org. Accessed 13 December 2001.
61.
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Available at: http://www.opcw.org. Accessed 13 December 2001.
62.
Sidel VW. Quid est amor patriae? PSR Q. 1991;1:96–104.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
328
63.
Geiger HJ. Conscience and obligation: Physicians and just war. PSR Q. 1991;1:113–116.
64.
Wakin MM. Wanted: Moral virtues in the military. Hastings Cent Rep. 1985;15(5):25–26.
65.
Moskop JC. A moral analysis of military medicine. Mil Med. 1998;163(2):76–79.
66.
Pellegrino ED. Societal duty and moral complicity: The physician’s dilemma of divided loyalty. Int J Law Psychiatry. 1993;6:371–391.
67.
Iacopino V, Heisler M, Pishevar S, Kirschner RH. Physician complicity in misrepresentation and omission of
evidence of torture in postdetention medical examinations in Turkey. JAMA. 1996;276(5):396–402.
68.
British Medical Association. Medicine Betrayed: The Participation of Doctors in Human Rights Abuses. London: Zed
Books; 1992.
69.
Amnesty International. Prescription for Change: Health Professionals and the Exposure of Human Rights Violations.
London: Amnesty International; 1996.
70.
Westermeyer J. Compromise, complicity, and torture [editorial]. JAMA. 1996;276(5):416–417.
71.
Farrar JT. Medicine needs a code of ethics. Mil Med. 1986;151(2):130.
72.
Carter JH. Military race relations: The responsibility of mental health professionals. Mil Med. 1978;143(11):779–781.
73.
Platoni KT. The quest for ethical leadership in military medicine. Mil Med. 1994;159(2):169–171.
74.
Ryle JA. Foreword. In: Joules E, ed. The Doctor’s View of War. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd; 1938: 7–10.
75.
Liberman R, Gold W, Sidel VW. Medical ethics and the military. N Physician. 1968;17:299–309.
76.
Lown B. Nobel Peace Prize lecture: A prescription for hope. N Engl J Med. 1986;314(15):985–987.
77.
Levy BS, Sidel VW. Preventing war and its health consequences: Roles of public health professionals. In: Levy
BS, Sidel VW, eds. War and Public Health. New York: Oxford University Press; 1997: 388–393.
78.
Engelhardt HT. Fear of flying: The psychiatrist’s role in war. Hastings Cent Rep. 1976;6:21.
79.
Veatch RM. The psychiatrist’s role in war. In: Case Studies in Medical Ethics. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press; 1977: 245–251.
80.
Hopkins JET, Stelling HG, Voorhees TS. The marauders and the microbes: A record of righteous indignation.
In: Stone JH, ed. Crisis Fleeting. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, US Department of the Army;1969:
293–396.
81.
Koehler RH, Smith RS, Bacaner T. Triage of American combat casualties: The need for change. Mil Med.
1994;159(8):541–547.
82.
Howe EG, Martin E. The use of investigational drugs without obtaining servicepersons’ consent in the Persian
Gulf. Hastings Cent Rep. 1991;21:21–24.
83.
Nass M. Anthrax vaccine. Model of a response to the biological warfare threat. Infect Dis Clin North Am.
1999;13(1):187–208.
84.
Lane HC, Fauci AS. Bioterrorism on the home front a new challenge for American medicine. JAMA.
2001;286:2595–2597.
85.
Daniels AK. In the service of the state: The psychiatrist as double agent. Hastings Cent Rep. 1978;8(special
suppl):3–6.
Physician-Soldier: A Moral Dilemma?
329
86.
Howe EG. Confidentiality in the military. Behav Sci Law. 1989;7(3):317–337.
87.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Surveillance for adverse events associated with anthrax vaccination—US Department of Defense, 1998–2000. JAMA. 2000;283:2648–2649.
88.
Gerardi SM. The management of battle-fatigued soldiers: an occupational therapy model. Mil Med.
1996;161(8):483–488.
89.
Hazen S, Llewellyn C. Battle fatigue identification and management for military medical students. Mil Med.
1991;156(6):263–267.
90.
Carter BS. Ethical concerns for physicians deployed to Operation Desert Storm. Mil Med. 1994;159(1):55–59.
91.
Parks WH. Memorandum for the Surgeon General, Article 10, 1977. Protocols Additional to the Geneva Convention/August 12, 1949:21 July 1983.
92.
Agora. The US decision not to ratify protocol I to the Geneva Convention on the protection of war victims. Am
J Intl Law. 1988;82:784–787.
93.
Vastyan EA. Warriors in white: Some questions about the nature and mission of military medicine. Texas Rep
Biol Med. 1974;32:327–342.
94.
Neel S. The medical role in army stability operations. Mil Med. 1967;67:605.
95.
Allodi F, Cowgill G. Ethical and psychiatric aspects of torture: A Canadian study. Can J Psychiatry. 1982;27(2):98–102.
96.
Drinan RF. The Mobilization of Shame. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press; 2001: 98.
97.
Graessner S, Gurris N, Pross C, eds. Riemer JM, trans. At the Side of Torture Survivors. Baltimore, Md: The Johns
Hopkins University Press; 2001.
98.
Livingston GS. Medicine and the military. In: Visscher MB, ed. Humanitarian Perspectives in Medical Ethics. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books; 1972: 268.
99.
Livingston GS. Letter from a Vietnam veteran. Saturday Review. 1969;(September 20):22–23.
100.
Nightingale EO, Stover E. A question of conscience. Physicians in defense of human rights. JAMA.
1986;255(20):2794–2797.
101.
Cohen C. Conscientious objection. Ethics. 1968;78:269–279.
102.
Linn R. Moral judgment in extreme social contexts: soldiers who refuse to fight and physicians who strike. J
Appl Soc Psychol. 1988;1149–1170.
103.
Bowles CS. Report of Charles SP Bowles, Foreign Agent of the United States Sanitary Commission Upon the
International Congress of Geneva. London: R. Clay, Son & Taylor; 1864.
104.
Longmore T. On the Geneva convention of 1864, in relation to the aid afforded by volunteer societies to sick
and wounded soldiers during the late Franco-German war…1866. Surg Gen Cat. 1866;1(16):1–21.
105.
Hayden DL. Should there be a psychotherapist privilege in military court-martials. Mil Law Rev. 1989;123:31–107.
Military Medical Ethics, Volume 1
330
