431
Medical Readiness
Chapter 30
MEDICAL READINESS
CHRISTOPHER W. BUNT, MD,* and BONNIE SANCHEZ†
INTRODUCTION
ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
Predeployment
Deployment
Postdeployment 
GUIDANCE TO THE COMMANDING OFFICER
SUMMARY
*Lieutenant Colonel, US Air Force Reserves, Medical Corps; Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, South Carolina
†Senior Master Sergeant, US Air Force; Air Force District of Washington Functional Manager, Malcolm Grow Medical Clinics and Surgery Center, 
Joint Base Andrews, Maryland
432
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Medical readiness involves a series of assessments 
to ensure that uniformed service members (USMs) are 
free of health-related conditions that endanger others 
or limit their ability to achieve their assigned mission. 
Medical readiness also refers to the ability of medical 
units in each service to prepare their medical personnel to provide healthcare to military members at home 
and abroad. The role of the military medical officer 
(MMO) is to both support and advise the commanding 
officer (CO). While the CO is ultimately responsible 
for military and medical readiness accountability, it 
is the MMO’s duty to lead the team that will screen, 
evaluate, and treat members as needed per mission 
requirements and the CO’s directives. This chapter 
will examine the physical conditions and procedures 
essential to medical readiness for the USM. 
In 2008, the Institute for Healthcare Improvement 
introduced three critical objectives in healthcare 
provision. Labeled the “Triple Aim,” the three objectives are (1) better health, (2) better patient care, and 
(3) lower costs. 1,2 In 2009, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) added a fourth objective, medical readiness, 
and renamed the concept the “Quadruple Aim.”3 
DoD healthcare directives and instructions now must 
always consider their impact on the Quadruple Aim. 
Medical readiness is an essential component in the 
preparation of the USM for deployment. In general, 
the deployed environment is more taxing to the individual USM and does not have the same medical 
capabilities as the continental United States (CONUS). 
This chapter is divided into sections focusing on the 
aspects of medical readiness that are handled before, 
during, and after deployment. The term “deployment” 
encompasses contingency deployments in support 
of military operations (eg, Operation Enduring Freedom); overseas assignments (outside CONUS); and 
military operations other than war (eg, humanitarian 
missions). Multiple areas of readiness overlap, and 
this chapter presents a framework to assist with information retention. While every aspect of a medical 
encounter can be essential for the USM’s readiness, 
this chapter’s focus will be on the military-unique 
readiness items. Exhibit 30-1 provides a quick reference checklist for the MMO.
EXHIBIT 30-1
MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER QUICK 
REFERENCE MEDICAL FITNESS CHECKLIST 
 
• Periodic health assessment (PHA) 
 
• Disease surveillance (laboratory testing, eg, 
HIV, TB)
 
• Routine immunizations
 
• Chemoprophylaxis (eg, anti-malarials)
 
• Dental readiness
 
• Vision readiness
 
• Hearing readiness
 
• Baseline neurocognitive assessment (eg, 
ANAM) 
ANAM: Automated Neuropsychological Assessment Metrics
HIV: human immunodeficiency virus
TB: tuberculosis
Adapted from: O’Connor FG, Deuster PA, DeGroot DW, 
White DW. Medical and environmental fitness. Mil Med. 
2010;175(8:57):57-64.
ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
Predeployment
Predeployment includes the period of time from the 
USM’s entry into military service up through their first 
deployment. By definition, this period overlaps with 
the postdeployment period leading up to the USM’s 
second and subsequent deployments. Reviewing the 
USM’s medical history and medical record is the first 
step in determining their individual medical readiness. 
From this initial review, recommendations are made 
about next steps, including prevention, evaluation, 
and treatment.
Prevention
The first step in ensuring optimal health for all 
USMs is preventing illness and disability. Prevention is divided into four discrete areas: (1) screening, 
(2) immunizations, (3) behavioral modifications, 
and (4) chemoprophylaxis (prophylactic use of 
medications to prevent illness). Table 30-1 provides 
examples of each. Of these areas, immunizations 
and chemoprophylaxis are currently the most 
evidence-based. 4
Screening. Screening is the most comprehensive 
of the four areas of prevention, and includes mental 
health history, neuropsychological testing, disease 
surveillance, dental examinations, annual preventive 
health assessments (PHAs), and occupation-specific 
examinations (eg, for aviators).
433
Medical Readiness
TABLE 30-1 
PREDEPLOYMENT PREVENTION 
Form of Prevention
Examples
Screening
Mental health history: Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2)
Neuropsychological testing, eg, baseline TBI screens: Automated Neuropsychological Assessment Metrics (ANAM)
Disease Surveillance, eg, laboratory testing: USPSTF recommendations, HIV, cholesterol, 
cancer screening (colon, cervical)
Dental examinations: at least annual exams and subsequent classification assigned (1–4)
Preventive Health Assessments (PHA): at least annually.
Occupation-specific examinations: aviators, Personnel Reliability Program (nuclear weapons 
handling and support), Presidential Support Program 
Immunizations
CDC-required and recommended immunizations (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/)
Host-nation-specific immunizations, eg, yellow fever for Far East countries
Behavioral modifications
Substance use/abuse evaluation
Exercise habits
Dietary practices
Medical therapy compliance
Chemoprophylaxis
Anti-malarials
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; TBI: traumatic brain injury; USPSTF: US Preventive Services Task Force
Mental health history and testing is done during 
the annual PHA and subsequently with each medical 
encounter. Given potential impacts on the mission, 
depression screening is done at the beginning of each 
encounter. The most frequently used “first-step” method for screening for depression is the Patient Health 
Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2). 5 This survey instrument asks 
the USM to quantify his or her level of (1) anhedonia 
(lack of interest in activities) and (2) depressed mood 
over the most recent 2 weeks. Each question is graded 
on a 4-point Likert scale, with 0 equal to “not at all” and 
3 corresponding to “nearly every day.” Those patients 
who have a two question-combined answer score of 3 
or higher are referred for additional evaluation. 5 
It is extremely important to detect and treat traumatic brain injury (TBI), including mild-TBI (concussions), 
yet these injuries remain hard to detect. Screening 
USMs for TBI involves baseline testing of neurological status during predeployment, and then follow-up 
testing after actual or possible TBI events. Baseline 
and post-event testing in the military are performed 
using tools such as the Automated Neuropsychological Assessment Metrics (ANAM). 6,7 Another option for 
testing at the point of care (in the field or clinic) after 
an event is the Military Acute Concussion Evaluation 
(MACE). 8
Disease surveillance, including laboratory testing, 
is most often based on service-specific regulations 
and DoD instructions. 4 These regulations, in turn, 
are often based on the recommendations of the US 
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). The USPSTF 
makes recommendations after an exhaustive objective 
review of all available evidence about a diagnostic test, 
therapeutic procedure, or other treatment. Its recommendation statements fall into one of three categories: 
recommended, uncertain, or not recommended. 9 
Other disease surveillance testing currently in place 
for USMs includes human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), which is recommended every 18 to 24 months 
in the DoD, and non-fasting lipids (cholesterol), recommended every 5 years. 
Disease surveillance screening is not limited to laboratory studies, however. Cancer screening is another 
aspect of prevention, and can include laboratory testing (for cervical and colon cancer) as well as imaging 
(for breast and colon cancer) or other procedures (for 
colon cancer). Current recommendations for cervical 
cancer screening in average-risk women include a 
cervical Papanicolaou (pap) smear every 3 years in 
females ages 21 to 29, and either a pap smear every 
3 years or a high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) 
test every 5 years in females ages 30 to 65. The cur434
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
rent recommendation for breast cancer screening is 
that average risk women (those without a first-degree 
relative family history of breast/ovarian cancer) should 
be screened with mammography every 2 years starting 
at age 50. Colon cancer screening recommendations 
include options for fecal occult blood testing (a laboratory study), computed tomography colonography 
(radiographic imaging), or colonoscopy (a procedure). 
The frequency for these tests vary with risk level, findings, age, and ethnicity. 9
Dental readiness is a key component of medical 
readiness. All USMs need at least annual dental visits 
that include an exam and cleaning, and consequently 
they are grouped into four dental classes: those in 
class 1 do not require dental treatment for 12 months; 
those in class 2 require treatment within 12 months; 
those in class 3 require immediate treatment to avoid 
a dental emergency; and those in class 4 have not had 
a dental exam in the past 13 months. Classes 2 through 
4 require limited mobility and duties due to urgency 
or gravity of the dental situation, and make the USM 
not medically ready. 
The annual PHA is a required screening medical 
encounter for all USMs. All services rely on the member to report concerns in a pre-encounter survey and 
the provider to review the member’s responses, previous encounters, and medical record. Screening items 
include routine vital signs, visual acuity, and memberreported mental and physical health concerns. This is 
often the only opportunity for the majority of USMs 
to update their information, specifically capturing 
any medical encounters from the civilian sector (the 
military’s electronic medical record does not currently 
communicate with the civilian side) and new changes 
to their health. For specific USMs (eg, aviators, age > 
50) hearing screening may also be done during or in 
association with the PHA. 4
Some DoD units have additional requirements 
for medical readiness. These units include aviation 
(each medical decision or recommendation must be 
reviewed and approved by a flight surgeon prior to 
approving flight status) and those involved in the 
Presidential Support Program (PSP) and the Personnel 
Reliability Program (PRP). PSP personnel support the 
US president and presidential activities. PRP personnel either support activities involving or directly work 
with nuclear weapons. Given the high stakes involved 
with these activities, the healthcare of these personnel 
is monitored closely, with each medical interaction 
and decision requiring review and evaluation by the 
PSP/PRP medical team prior to the USM’s return to 
full duties. 10 
Immunizations. While immunizations protect the 
individuals who receive them, immunizations also 
provide “herd” or community immunity, whereby 
community members who cannot receive a vaccine 
(infants, pregnant women, immunocompromised 
individuals) are still protected from a contagious 
disease outbreak because critical members are immunized. 11 Immunizations are one of the most significant medical breakthroughs in history, and have 
helped the developed world eradicate contagious 
diseases such as polio. The DoD requires all vaccinations recommended by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) for each USM. 12 All 
of the current recommended immunizations can be 
found on the CDC website (http://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/schedules/). MMOs should be familiar 
with the various databases used by the DoD to track 
USMs’ immunizations status (see Data Management, below). 
Behavioral modification. One of the most important aspects of prevention involves behavior change. 
Areas of behavior that should be addressed include 
substance use or abuse (tobacco and alcohol most commonly), poor diet, poor exercise habits, and medical 
therapy noncompliance. Changing these behaviors 
by assessing the patient’s willingness to change and 
then moving forward with specific, achievable goals 
is a powerful tool that can improve health and medical readiness for that individual and the military unit. 
Motivational interviewing is an effective technique that 
MMOs can use in behavior change counseling. This is 
a collaborative effort (usually initiated as a conversation) between the patient and provider to facilitate 
behavior change. 13 
Chemoprophylaxis. Prophylactic use of certain 
medications can also provide protection against illness and disability. For instance, pregnant USMs 
will receive prophylactic antibiotics during labor 
and delivery when they test positive for Group Beta 
Streptococcus (GBS). The most commonly used chemoprophylaxis method in the USM is anti-malarials. 
Other examples include taking aspirin for primary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and colon 
cancer in adults 50 to 59 with a greater than 10% 10year CVD risk. 
Evaluation
If the screening process, or a USM, raises a concern, 
further evaluation is required. Evaluation can include a 
focused history, physical examination, and diagnostic 
testing (laboratory and radiologic imaging). It may 
also involve referral from a primary care provider to 
a secondary care (specialist or subspecialist) provider. 
The MMO must work efficiently and effectively to 
evaluate any complaint or issue, with a keen focus on 
patient safety and health while minimizing mission 
disruptions.
435
Medical Readiness
TABLE 30-2
SERVICE-SPECIFIC PROFILING BASICS 
Army
Temporary or “T” 
• Definite endpoint with expectation of improving 
or resolving condition
• May complete “diagnostic” APFT but no recorded 
APFT
• If for less than 7 days, is entered on a “sick call 
slip,” form DD689 
• If more than 7 days, entered as e-Profile into 
MEDPROS as a DLC
• Does not lead directly to an MEB
• Recurrent T profiles may warrant a formal FFRE 
which may lead to MEB
Permanent or “P”
• Indefinite endpoint, with no expectation of 
improvement or resolution to RTD or 1 year has 
elapsed from date of injury/disease
• Indicated when soldier has met MRDP for at least 
one condition
• Alternate APFT is authorized when any APFT 
event is medically contraindicated or unsafe
• Requires approval authority
• If PULHES 3 or 4, referral to MEB is mandatory
Navy
Temporary Limited Duty (TLD)
• Appropriate for sailors who will likely return to 
an unrestricted duty status
• If expected RTD is <30 days, use light duty form, 
NAVMED 6310-1; may be extended in 30-day 
increments, max 90 days
• If expected RTD is > 90 days, documented on 
LIMDU form, NAVMED 6100/5, and authorize in 
6-month increments (12-month max)
• Enlisted: MTF convening authority may authorize 
up to 12 months of TLD; additional TLD must be 
approved by Navy Personnel Command (PERS82)
• Officers: TLD requests must be approved by 
PERS-82
• Members referred to PEB for disability adjudication are placed on TLD pending PEB outcome
Permanent Limited Duty (PLD)
• Allows USMs to continue on active duty in a limited assignment when there is a need for their skill 
or experience
• Each case individually considered, member’s 
length of service is not controlling factor in PLD 
decisions
• Through referral to PEB process and processed on 
NAVMED form 6100/5
• Upon USM’s request, PERS-82 may retain an “unfit 
to continue naval service” member in a PLD status 
when the retention is in the best interest of the 
service and consistent with guidance in paragraph 
6003 of SECNAVINST 1850. 4E
• PLD will not be approved when retention in PLD 
status would jeopardize USM’s or other’s health or 
safety
Air Force
Duty-Limiting Condition (DLC)
• Definite endpoint, resolution expected in 31–365 
days
• Completed on AF Form 469 in ASIMS
• 469 must define duty restrictions including what 
member cannot do (templates available)
• 469 must also include applicable FRs (cardio – run 
or walk, push-ups, sit-ups, abdominal circumference, height, weight)
• Completed 469 requires commander’s signature
• Does not lead directly to MEB
• 365 cumulative days for same condition warrants 
referral to DAWG at local MTF
Mobility-Limiting Condition (MLC)
• Definite or indefinite endpoint 
• Also completed on AF Form 469 in ASIMS with MR 
box checked
• Condition may not improve or resolve 
• Associated with specific diagnoses 
• Members are not worldwide qualified and may not 
PCS or do TDY (see Medical Standards Directory* 
for a list of current medical standards for retention, 
flying classes, and special operational duty)
• Will likely lead directly to MEB (pregnancy is mobility restricting, but does not lead to an MEB)
*Air Force Medical Service Knowledge Exchange (https://kx.afms.mil)
APFT: Army Physical Fitness Test
ASIMS: Aeromedical Services Information 
Management System
DAWG: Deployment Availability Working 
Group
DLC: duty-limiting condition
FFRE: fit-for-retention evaluation
FR: fitness restriction
LIMDU: limited duty
MEB: medical evaluation board
MEDPROS: Medical Protection System
MLC: mobility-limiting condition
MR: mobility restriction
MRDP: medical retention determination point 
MTF: medical treatment facility
PCS: permanent change of station
PEB: physical evaluation board 
RTD: return to duty
TDY/TAD: temporary duty
USM: uniformed service member
Data sources: (1) Sloan D, Garner K. Cross service communications: writing profiles for an increasingly joint environment. Uniformed Fam 
Physician. 2015;Winter:29–32. (2) US Department of the Army. Standards of Medical Fitness. Washington, DC: DA; 2011. Army Regulation 
40-501. (3) US Department of the Air Force. Duty-Limiting Conditions. Washington, DC: DAF; 2013. Air Force Instruction 10-203. (4) US 
Department of the Air Force. Medical Examinations and Standards. Washington, DC: DAF; 2014. Air Force Instruction 48-123. (5) US Navy 
Personnel Command. Limited Duty (LIMDU). Washington, DC: DN; 2004. MILPERSMAN 1306-1200. (6) US Navy Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery. Medical evaluation boards. In: Manual of the Medical Department. Washington, DC: BUMED; 2005: Chap 18.
436
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 30-3
PHYSICAL PROFILE SERIAL CHART (PULHES) AND HEARING PROFILE
1
2
3
4
P: Physical 
Condition
Free of any identified organic defect or systemic 
disease.
Presence of stable, minimally significant organic 
defect(s) or systemic 
diseases(s). Capable of 
all basic work commensurate with grade and 
position. May be used to 
identify minor conditions 
that might limit some 
deployments to specific 
locations.
Significant defect(s) 
or disease(s) under 
good control. 
Capable of all basic 
work commensurate with grade and 
position.
Organic defect, systemic or infectious disease which requires, or 
is currently undergoing, a Medical Evaluation Board (MEB) or 
Initial Review in lieu of Medical 
Evaluation Board (IRILOMEB) 
as determined by the Deployment Availability Working 
Group (DAWG).
U: Upper 
Extremities
Bones, joints, and 
muscles normal. 
Able to do handto-hand fighting.
Slightly limited mobility 
of joints, mild muscular 
weakness or other musculoskeletal defects that 
do not prevent hand-tohand fighting and are 
compatible with prolonged effort. Capable of 
all basic work commensurate with grade and 
position.
Defect(s) causing 
moderate interference with function, yet capable 
of strong effort 
for short periods. 
Capable of all basic 
work commensurate with grade and 
position.
Severely compromised strength, 
range of motion, or general efficiency of the hand, arm, shoulder girdle, or back (includes 
cervical and thoracic spine) 
which requires, or is currently 
undergoing, a Medical Evaluation Board (MEB) or Initial 
Review in lieu of Medical Evaluation Board (IRILOMEB) as 
determined by the Deployment 
Availability Working Group 
(DAWG).
L: Lower 
Extremities
Bones, muscles, 
and joints normal. Capable of 
performing long 
marches, continuous standing, 
running, climbing, and digging 
without limitation.
Slightly limited mobility 
of joints, mild muscular 
weakness, or other musculoskeletal defects that 
do not prevent moderate marching, climbing, 
running, digging, or prolonged effort. Capable of 
all basic work commensurate with grade and 
position.
Defect(s) causing 
moderate interference with function, yet capable 
of strong effort 
for short periods. 
Capable of all basic 
work commensurate with grade and 
position.
Severely compromised strength, 
range of motion, or efficiency 
of the feet, legs, pelvic girdle, 
lower back, or lumbar vertebrae 
which requires, or is currently 
undergoing, a Medical Evaluation Board (MEB) or Initial 
Review in lieu of Medical Evaluation Board (IRILOMEB) as 
determined by the Deployment 
Availability Working Group 
(DAWG).
H: Hearing (Ears). See Table A3. 2.
E: Vision 
(Eyes)
Minimum vision 
of 20/200 correctable to 20/20 in 
each eye.
Vision correctable to 20/40 
in one eye and 20/70 in 
the other, or 20/30 in 
one eye and 20/200 in 
the other eye, or 20/20 in 
one eye and 20/400 in the 
other eye.
Vision that is worse 
than E-2 profile.
Visual defects worse than E-3 
which requires, or is currently 
undergoing, a Medical Evaluation Board (MEB) or Initial 
Review in lieu of Medical Evaluation Board (IRILOMEB) as 
determined by the Deployment 
Availability Working Group 
(DAWG).
(Table 30-3 continues)
437
Medical Readiness
S: Psychiatric 
Stability
Diagnosis or 
treatment results 
in no impairment or potential 
impairment of 
duty function, 
risk to the mission or ability to 
maintain security 
clearance.
World Wide Qualified 
and diagnosis or treatment results in low risk 
of impairment or potential impairment that 
necessitates command 
consideration of changing or limiting duties.
World Wide Qualified and diagnosis 
or treatment results 
in medium risk 
due to potential 
impairment of duty 
function, risk to the 
mission or ability to 
maintain security 
clearance.
Diagnosis or treatment resulting in high to extremely high 
risk to the AF or patient due to 
potential impairment of duty 
function, risk to the mission 
or ability to maintain security 
clearance which requires, or is 
currently undergoing, a Medical Evaluation Board (MEB) or 
Initial Review in lieu of Medical 
Evaluation Board (IRILOMEB) 
as determined by the Deployment Availability Working 
Group (DAWG).
Acceptable audiometric hearing level for Air Force
Unaided hearing loss in either ear with no single value greater than:
Frequency 
 (Hz)
500
1000
2000
3000
4000
6000
Comments
H-1
25
25
25
35
45
45
Class I and IA, IFCII, IFCIII, Air Force Academy, Ground Based 
Controller (GBC), and selected career fields as noted in the Officer and Enlisted Classification directories.
H-2
35
35
35
45
55
-Air Force enlistment, commission, initial Missile Operations Duty 
(MOD), Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE), continued Ground Based Controller (GBC), flyers require evaluation 
for continued flying (see Aircrew waiver guide for details on the 
evaluation).
H-3
Any loss that exceeds the values noted 
above, but does not qualify for H-4.
H-3 profile requires evaluation and Major Command waiver for 
continued flying, and Audiology evaluation for fitness for continued active duty.
H-4
Hearing loss sufficient to preclude safe 
and effective performance of duty, 
regardless of level of pure tone hearing 
loss, and despite use of hearing aids.
This degree of hearing loss is disqualifying for all military duty. 
These require evaluation for continued service via either Air 
Reserve Component Fitness for Duty (FFD), Worldwide Duty 
(WWD) processing, or review by the Deployment Availability 
Working Group (DAWG) in accordance with Air Force Instruction 10-203 and 41-210 for Initial Review in lieu of Medical Evaluation Board.
Reproduced from: US Department of the Air Force. Medical Examinations and Standards. Washington, DC: DAF; 2018. Air Force Instruction 
48-123. Attachment 3, Tables A3. 1 and A3. 2.
Table 30-3 continued
438
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 30-2
MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER DEPLOYMENT CONCERNS FOR INDIVIDUAL 
DEPLOYERS
Immunization status
• Review and update all CDC-required immunizations
• Consider/give: smallpox and anthrax
• Consider other location-specific immunizations 
(eg, yellow fever)
Personal protection
• Appropriately-sized gas mask
• Two pairs of corrective lenses and gas mask inserts 
(if applicable)
• Consider anti-malarials
Location-specific occupational health issues
• Consider climate
• Consider specific health needs (electrical outlet, 
refrigeration, etc)
• Consider medications/immunizations
Treatment
Once a condition has been evaluated and diagnosed, treatment is the logical next step. While not all 
conditions or patient complaints can be diagnosed, 
the MMO must determine whether there is potential 
harm for the individual, society, the unit, or the mission. If the possibility of harm exists, treatment must 
be completed at the recommended interval, and the 
MMO must be in communication with the member’s 
CO as well as their own medical CO about the issue. 
Communication of medically necessary information 
among all parties facilitates decision-making and is an 
example of the crucial advisory role the MMO plays 
for the military CO.
Physical Profiles and Medical Evaluation Boards
The main tool for communicating medical limitations for a USM is the physical profile. While each 
service has unique ways of handling light duty, 
profiles, and subsequent referrals to medical evaluation boards (MEBs), each requires the MMO to communicate a USM’s medical readiness status to their 
respective CO (Table 30-2). All services use (to varying 
degrees) the physical profile serial system to analyze 
and “grade” the functions of various organs, systems, 
and integral body parts. This grading system has six 
factors, designated as “P-U-L-H-E-S,” in which each 
letter delineates a specific medical area (Table 30-3). 
All potential restrictions can impact promotion and 
the mission, and therefore must be used appropriately 
and judiciously. 
Physical profiles can convey medically directed and 
recommended restrictions on duties, mobility status, 
and fitness participation and testing. Duty activities 
that are restricted are generally occupation-specific 
(lifting, carrying, jumping, etc) but can be general in 
nature because fitness is considered a core USM duty. 
Duty restrictions are usually attached to conditions 
that will resolve within 31 to 365 days (eg, ankle sprain, 
fractured bone). Mobility restrictions can impact deployments, permanent change of station moves, and 
temporary duty assignments. Mobility restrictions are 
generally recommended when specific diagnoses are 
made (eg, cancer, suicidal ideation, diabetes) and the 
workup of the condition is ongoing. Fitness restrictions can directly impact the USM’s ability to complete 
required physical fitness testing. Fitness restrictions 
may occur in conjunction with either a duty or mobility limitation (eg, a postoperative procedure). For each 
stated restriction in the written profile, the USM’s CO 
has ultimate authority for determining whether to accept or reject the recommendation. 
MEBs are convened when a military member is 
diagnosed with a specific medical condition that could 
have a permanent or long-term impact on their ability 
to perform mission or duty requirements. MEBs can 
be initiated for either duty or mobility limitations, and 
must be considered with each limitation or recommended restriction. Each service has a separate process and threshold for carrying out an MEB, although 
each requires that the patient’s primary care manager 
complete a narrative summary that details all of the 
current medical issues and delineates their potential 
mission/duty impact. The USM’s CO is also required 
to write a letter determining the mission impact of the 
USM’s condition. The entire package is reviewed by 
an objective team of multidisciplinary professionals, 
who render the final decision. The decision results in 
one of three outcomes for the USM: (1) return to duty 
without restriction, (2) return to duty with defined 
restrictions, or (3) separate or medically retire from 
military service. Table 30-4 lists MEB and physical 
profile resources for each service.
Data Management
The DoD maintains multiple databases that track 
USM medical readiness. The Air Force currently uses 
the Aeromedical Services Information Management 
System (ASIMS), the Army uses the Medical Protection 
439
Medical Readiness
TABLE 30-4
MEDICAL EVALUATION BOARD AND PHYSICAL PROFILE REFERENCES
Service
Document
URL
Army
AR 40-501
https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN3801_AR40-501_Web_FINAL.pdf
Navy
MANMED, 
Chapter 18
https://www.med.navy.mil/directives/Documents/NAVMED%20P-117%20%28MANMED%29/
MMDChapter18pdf
SECNAVINST 
1850. 4E
http://www.secnav.navy.mil/mra/CORB/Documents/SECNAVINST-1850-4E.PDF
Air 
Force
AFI 10-203
https://www.afpc.af.mil/Portals/70/documents/06_CAREER%20MANAGEMENT/03_
Fitness%20Program/Air%20Force%20Instruction%2010-203.pdf?ver=2018-08-22-115744-620
AFI 48-123
http://static.e-publishing.af.mil/production/1/af_sg/publication/afi48-123/afi48-123.pdf
TABLE 30-5
MEDICAL READINESS DATABASES
Service
Database
Acronym
URL
Army
Medical Protection System
MEDPROS
https://medpros.mods.army.mil/MEDPROSNew/
Navy
Medical Readiness and Reporting System
MRRS
https://mrrs.sscno.nmci.navy.mil/mrrs/
Air Force
Aeromedical Services Information Management System
ASIMS
https://asims.afms.mil/webapp/Login.aspx
System (MEDPROS), and the Navy and Marine Corps 
utilize the Medical Readiness and Reporting System 
(MRRS). Table 30-5 lists the URL for each. All have 
the common goal of providing a CO a quick snapshot 
of the unit’s medical readiness. It is important for the 
MMO to be facile with entry and review of data in 
these repositories. 
Deployment
Upon receipt of orders for a contingency deployment, the USM’s full record must be evaluated for 
medical readiness. All of the predeployment requirements listed above must be reviewed and completed 
in a timely and efficient manner, which will depend 
on how well the MMO has maintained an appropriate 
and correct database of information for each member of 
the unit. Ultimately, the MMO must medically “clear” 
each individual for deployment. Several key concerns 
for the MMO once deployment orders have been received are the USM’s immunization status, personal 
protection, and location-specific occupational health 
issues (Exhibit 30-2).
Required immunizations should be updated for 
each USM before deployment orders arrive, but current requirements for the deployment’s determined 
area of responsibility (AOR) should be reviewed. Two 
common immunizations in the current AOR that play 
a role in deployment preparation are smallpox and 
anthrax. Each USM must complete screening forms 
to determine medical eligibility for these immunizations, and the MMO is ultimately responsible for 
determining whether the member should be issued 
these critical immunizations predeployment or in the 
AOR. Additional immunizations may be necessary 
based on the specific AOR.
Personal protection is another key component of 
medical readiness. Anti-malarials are an example of 
chemoprophylaxis personal protection. In addition, 
all deploying members must be fitted for and then 
issued an appropriately sized gas mask prior to their 
departure for the AOR. This often is completed under 
the guidance of the MMO or the MMO’s designee. 
Dovetailing with gas mask fitting, the MMO must 
ensure that each member who requires vision correction has two pairs of corrective lenses (ie, eyeglasses; 
contact lenses are not allowed in the AOR) and gas 
mask inserts with the same prescription.
The MMO must also consider occupation-specific 
information about the AOR to enhance environmental medical readiness. While predeployment medical 
readiness covers many different aspects, specific AORs 
440
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
have unique prevention needs. Targets of prevention may include medications (anti-malarials) and 
immunizations (yellow fever). A USM’s individual 
health needs may also play a role. Certain health 
conditions may limit the USM’s ability to perform 
(including the need for electrical outlets for medical 
equipment, refrigeration of medications, etc). Additionally, understanding and preparing for the AOR’s 
climate can reduce climate-induced morbidity (heat 
or cold injuries).
Postdeployment
Postdeployment time focuses on reunion and readjustment for the USM. While many areas begin to 
overlap with the subsequent predeployment period, 
a major focus for the MMO after deployment is the 
Post-Deployment Health Re-Assessment Program 
(PDHRA). This program involves a sequenced process 
including member survey completion and face-to-face 
encounters immediately and at later intervals after 
redeployment home. The program’s main goal is determining whether any medical conditions or concerns 
developed during, or are related to, the deployment. 
The program also specifically targets significant concerns such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
TBI, and other environmental exposure issues. With 
appropriate evaluation, USMs can be rapidly and appropriately referred for further evaluation and treatment of any concerning condition. 14 
GUIDANCE TO COMMANDING OFFICER
The MMO should provide regularly scheduled 
updates about the unit’s medical readiness to the CO. 
Any deficiencies should be remedied, or at the very 
least, solutions provided as potential fixes. Expect 
the CO to demand 100% accountability for all medical readiness items, and anticipate that the CO will 
prevent USMs from taking leave or holiday time if 
the requirements are not met. Expectations are best 
managed with constant communication between the 
MMO and the CO.
SUMMARY
The MMO plays a crucial role in maintaining the 
medical readiness of each USM. It is imperative that 
the MMO work closely with the CO to facilitate rapid 
and efficient screening, evaluation, and treatment of 
each USM to ensure mission completion. Maintaining 
knowledge of the service-specific guidelines will enhance the USM’s medical readiness and help the DoD 
achieve the “Quadruple Aim.”
REFERENCES
 
1. Institute for Healthcare Improvement. The Triple Aim: Optimizing health, care and cost. Healthc Exec. 2009;24:64–66.
 
2. Berwick DM, Nolan TW, Whittington J. The triple aim: care, health, and cost. Health Aff. 2008;27(3):759–769. doi: 
10. 1377/hlthaff. 27. 3. 759. PubMed PMID: 18474969.
 
3. Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Chief Financial Officer. Managing the Military Health System. 
In: United States Department of Defense Fiscal Year 2015 Budget Request Overview. Washington, DC: DoD; 2014: 5-8. 
 
4. O’Connor FG, Deuster PA, DeGroot DW, White DW. Medical and environmental fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8):57–64.
 
5. STABLE National Coordinating Council Resource Toolkit Workgroup. Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2) 
overview. In: STABLE Resource Toolkit. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2007. http://
www.cqaimh.org/pdf/tool_phq2.pdf. Accessed March 8, 2018.
 
6. Kane RL, Roebuck-Spencer T, Short P, Kabat M, Wilken J. Identifying and monitoring cognitive deficits in clinical populations using Automated Neuropsychological Assessment Metrics (ANAM) tests. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 
2007;22:115–126. doi: 10. 1016/j.acn. 2006. 10. 006.
 
7. Rice V, Lindsay G, Overby C, et al. Automated Neuropsychological Assessment Metrics (ANAM) Traumatic Brain Injury 
(TBI): Human Factors Assessment. Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD: Army Research Laboratory; 2011.
441
Medical Readiness
 
8. Defense Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury. Military Acute Concussion Evaluation (MACE) pocket card. Defense and Veterans Brain Injury Center: Silver Spring, Maryland; 2012. https://dvbic.
dcoe.mil/files/resources/DVBIC_Military-Acute-Concussion-Evaluation_Pocket-Card. Accessed January 16, 2018.
 
9. US Preventive Services Task Force. Recommendations for primary care practice. Updated September 2017. http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/recommendations. Accessed September 28, 2017.
 10. US Department of Defense. DoD Nuclear Weapons Personnel Reliability Assurance. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016. DoD 
Instruction 5210. 42. 
 11. US Department of Health and Human Services. Community immunity (“herd immunity”). Vaccines.gov. http://www.
vaccines.gov/basics/protection/. Updated May 11, 2017. Accessed September 28, 2017.
 12. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Immunization schedules. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/. 
Updated February 6, 2017. Accessed September 28, 2017.
 13. Motivational Interviewing Network of Trainers website. http://www.motivationalinterviewing.org/. Published 2017. 
Accessed September 28, 2017.
 14. US Department of Defense Post-Deployment Health Reassessment. DoD Deployment Health Clinical Center website. 
http://www.pdhealth.mil/dcs/pdhra.asp. Accessed September 29, 2017.
442
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
