273
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
Section III
HUMAN PERFORMANCE 
OPTIMIZATION
Section Editors: 
Patricia A. Deuster, PhD, MPH, and Jonathan M. Scott, PhD
Army astronauts COL Andrew “Drew” Morgan and LTC Anne McClain, both from the astronaut class of 2013, prepare to be 
promoted while underwater following required training in the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory at the Sonny Carter Training 
Facility in Houston, Texas, September 27, 2018. (NASA Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory photo)
Reproduced from: https://www.dvidshub.net/image/4808055/army-astronauts.
274
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
275
The Evolution of Human Performance Optimization and Total Force Fitness
Chapter 19
THE EVOLUTION OF HUMAN 
PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION AND 
TOTAL FORCE FITNESS
PATRICIA A. DEUSTER, PhD, MPH*; FRANCIS G. O’CONNOR, MD, MPH†; and TRAVIS K. LUNASCO, PsyD‡
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
BACKGROUND 
Historical Context
Total Force Fitness Model
Role of Total Force Fitness in Force Health Protection and Readiness
Proposed Human Performance Optimization Model
Human Performance Optimization/Total Force Fitness: A Paradigm Shift
HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL 
OFFICER 
Role of the Military Medical Officer 
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
SUMMARY
*Professor and Director, Consortium for Health and Military Performance (CHAMP), Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, 
Maryland
†Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army; Professor and former Department Chairman, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
‡Senior Operational Psychologist, Consortium for Health and Military Performance, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed 
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
276
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Service members and their families are the most 
valuable assets to accomplish the mission of defending the country. This complex mission has resulted 
in unparalleled operational demands with multiple 
deployments and strains on the US armed forces. 
While extensive resources have always been expended to ensure equipment and materials are both 
state-of-the-art and in good repair, resources for 
maintaining and improving human performance, 
health, and resilience have been more limited. By 
2006, it had become clear that operational demands 
were degrading the capabilities, health, and resiliency 
of military communities.
To address this problem, the terms “human performance optimization” (HPO) and “total force fitness” 
(TFF) emerged as conceptual frameworks within the 
Department of Defense (DoD) to preserve the capabilities, health, and well-being of service members and 
their families. The performance, health, and well-being 
of the whole person, the family, and the community 
were viewed as fundamental to accomplishing the 
mission. Since that time, HPO and TFF have become 
recognized as cornerstones of an effective and efficient military, and the terms have become ingrained 
throughout the DoD. This chapter will define terms, 
provide a brief historical background, describe the 
holistic framework of TFF and the underpinnings of 
HPO, relate the terms to the role of a military medical 
officer (MMO), and then provide resources for the 
MMO relating to both HPO and TFF.
DEFINITIONS
 
• Human performance optimization. The 
process of applying knowledge, skills, and 
emerging technologies to improve and preserve the capabilities of military personnel to 
execute essential tasks. A number of related 
terms have been used to describe various 
aspect of HPO, for example, performance enhancement, performance sustainment, performance restoration, and human performance 
modification. The terms “enhancement,” 
“sustainment,” and “restoration” are aligned 
with phases of military missions.
 
◦ Performance enhancement. Optimizing 
and enhancing every system to the fullest 
degree possible before deployment.
 
◦ Performance sustainment. Sustaining performance at predeployment levels during 
deployment.
 
◦ Performance restoration. Restoring or 
returning performance to predeployment 
levels postdeployment. 
 
• Human performance modification. “Encompasses actions ranging from the use of 
“natural” materials such as caffeine or khat 
as stimulants, to the application of nanotechnology as a drug delivery mechanism or 
an invasive brain implant. 1 Although the literature on human performance modification 
typically addresses methods that enhance performance, another possible focus is methods 
that degrade performance or negatively affect 
a military force’s ability to fight.”1(p1) HPO is 
the preferred term because it is all encompassing—optimal is the end result—either 
through enhancement, modification, sustainment, or restoration. Human performance 
should be optimized whenever possible.
 
• Total force fitness. A holistic conceptual 
framework for understanding, assessing, and 
maintaining the fitness of the armed forces. 
The TFF framework starts with eight domains 
(medical/dental, nutritional, social, behavioral, environmental, psychological, spiritual, and physical) that can be tailored to the 
unique cultural framework of each military 
community. The interrelated functionality of 
TFF is informed by five overarching tenets as 
shown in Exhibit 19-1.
BACKGROUND
Historical Context
The concept of HPO, and its critical role for military success on the battlefield, has been appreciated 
for a long time. During the Civil War, Dr Jonathan 
Letterman, considered by many to be the “father of 
battlefield medicine,” recognized the importance of 
HPO, stating that “the leading idea [for the medical 
corps], which should be constantly kept in view, is 
to strengthen the hands of the Commanding General 
by keeping his Army in the most vigorous health, 
thus rendering it, in the highest degree, efficient for 
enduring fatigue and privation, and for fighting.”2 
In 1933 US Army General (then Colonel) George S. 
277
The Evolution of Human Performance Optimization and Total Force Fitness
Patton wrote, “Wars may be fought with weapons, 
but they are won by men. It is the spirit of the men 
who follow and of the man who leads that gains the 
victory.”3 After World War II, General Dwight D. 
Eisenhower said, “Guns and tanks and planes are 
nothing unless there is a solid spirit, a solid heart, and 
great productiveness behind it.”4 In 1987 US Army 
Special Forces Colonel John Collins emphasized that 
“hardware” is only a tool and that it is the person 
who determines success or failure. He is credited 
with developing the Special Operations Forces five 
truths, of which is “Humans are more important 
than hardware and their quality is more important 
than quantities.”5
It was not until 2006 that the term HPO actually 
emerged with energy within the DoD. An Office of 
Net Assessment report came out in 2005 challenging 
the DoD to take a look at how the most important 
resource—the service members—were being looked 
after. 6 In June 2006, the Consortium for Health and 
Military Performance (CHAMP) at the Uniformed 
Services University of the Health Sciences hosted a 
workshop called Human Performance Optimization: 
An Evolving Charge to the Department of Defense, 
with the findings published in Military Medicine. 7 
This workshop changed the course of HPO in the 
DoD, and resulted in the development of the Human 
Performance Resource Center (HPRC), a DoD website 
for all information relating to the improvement and 
preservation of human performance (hprc-online.
org). 
Total Force Fitness Model
In December 2009, CHAMP hosted a workshop 
on TFF that resulted in an instruction from the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which can be found 
on the HPRC website. 8 This guidance extended the 
concept of “physical fitness” to include body, mind, 
social, and spiritual domains; it created a more 
comprehensive and holistic framework to support 
and integrate joint and service-specific efforts that 
seek to promote health, enhance the resilience of 
service personnel, and improve effectiveness and 
efficiency of the force. 9–22 TFF integrates all aspects 
of health, well-being, and performance—and recognizes the important contributions of families, friends, 
communities, and units. In its application, the TFF 
framework and its tenets are designed to keep service members and their families performing at an 
optimal level: healthy, resilient, and flourishing in 
the environment of sustained deployment and combat operations. Thus, TFF and HPO are synergistic 
and complementary. They go together and must be 
considered as a unit. Figure 19-1 presents the eight 
original domains of TFF.
Any evaluation of TFF must be context specific 
because teams, units, families, and communities 
may be very effective at particular tasks, and less 
effective at others. For example, a combat unit may 
be very successful with mission efforts, but encounter problems when it returns from a deployment or 
during reintegration. Although the TFF framework 
identifies eight mind–body domains, social fitness 
has been highlighted as particularly critical for unit 
fitness because it is a robust resilience factor. 23 A 2013 
Rand report24 identified social support as a key factor 
that can affect an individual’s resilience. Social fitness also is very important for unit, family, peer, and 
community fitness. These are key signatures of military culture and operational success because people 
are primary drivers for effectiveness. Overall TFF 
is conceptualized in terms of healthy relationships 
among people and teams that contribute to optimal 
unit, family, and community well-being, resilience, 
and performance.
EXHIBIT 19-1
THE TENETS OF TOTAL FORCE FITNESS 
 
• Total fitness extends beyond the service member. Total fitness should enhance performance and preserve 
capabilities, improve health, and strengthen resilience in families, communities, and organizations.
 
• A service member’s family’s health plays a key role in sustained success and must be incorporated into any 
definition of total fitness.
 
• Total fitness metrics must measure positive and negative outcomes, and must show movement toward total 
fitness.
 
• Total fitness is linked to the fitness of the society from which the service members are drawn and to which 
they will return.
 
• Leadership is essential in achieving total fitness.
278
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Role of Total Force Fitness in Force Health 
Protection and Readiness
All eight TFF domains are important and require 
attention from leaders at multiple levels to ensure TFF 
of all units, an essential factor in force health protection, readiness, and preservation. The TFF conceptual 
framework places the service member at the center of 
the eight interrelated TFF domains and identifies the 
critical influence of the family, organization, and community (see Figure 19-1). This framework assumes that 
family, organizational, and community factors have 
a significant impact on individual fitness. The model 
also assumes that individual fitness has an important 
reciprocal relationship with fitness of larger social 
structures (eg, family, unit, community, and enterprise). 25 This is not surprising or unexpected, given 
that military culture emphasizes teamwork and group 
cohesion rather than individuals. 26
Proposed Human Performance Optimization Model
HPO builds on the framework of TFF with an 
orientation on performance. Figure 19-2 provides an 
understanding of HPO in comparison with traditionally offered healthcare delivery. The spectrum begins at 
left and movement to the right indicates degradation of 
capabilities, health, and resiliency. Traditional healthcare is considered “right-sided”: the driving force for 
engagement is centered on illness/pathology. Sustained 
HPO requires a holistic “left of the bang” engagement 
and orientation. Leveraging HPO sustainment and 
Figure 19-1. The total force fitness (TFF) framework identifying the critical influence of the family, community, organization, 
and the eight overarching domains of TFF.
improvements should be directed by the primary 
groups noted in the lower section of the figure. The 
MMO’s role and function in this process (“left” sided) 
will be different in comparison to that of working in a 
clinical/hospital setting (“right”-sided care). A deeper 
understanding of the need for a paradigm shift and 
community involvement is offered later in this chapter. 
HPO requires military cultural competency and a 
greater appreciation for the complexities of diverse 
service member communities and their missions. The 
demands/resources model (Figure 19-3) is an ideal 
tool to compliment the HPO-oriented framework and 
TFF model because it was developed to evaluate work 
performance. 27–29 The model proposed in Figure 19-3 
allows for performance metrics in multiple venues: 
family, relationships, and work. This model also 
includes multiple resources (individual, family, and 
external environment) and well-established demands 
(eg, work, family, financial, social). Overall, the concept is that optimal performance will be sustained 
when resources (individual, family, and external) 
match or exceed demands. HPO is resource focused. 
Figure 19-4 presents an overview of the multiple 
and competing individual, family, and other resources 
by various categories that contribute to performance 
in diverse venues. Although not complete, these 
various factors and environmental issues demonstrate 
the holistic approach: from cognitive to genetic and 
physiologic, from behavioral and individual skills and 
practices to social and physical environmental factors. 
Some of the contributors are inherent, whereas others 
may be state- or situation-dependent. As new evidence 
279
The Evolution of Human Performance Optimization and Total Force Fitness
Figure 19-2. The human performance optimization (HPO) demands/resources model. From top to bottom: (1) An orientation 
that focuses on the needs of each operator community and their mission essential tasks. (2) The rainbow spectrum begins at 
left (performance = purple), and movement to the right indicates degradation of capabilities, health, and resiliency. Traditional 
healthcare is considered “right of bang,” with its driving force for engagement centered on illness/pathology. Sustained HPO 
requires a holistic “left of bang” engagement and orientation. (3) Leveraging HPO sustainment and improvements should be 
directed by the primary agents with corresponding service types. (4) An orientation that moves beyond medical readiness 
toward mission readiness. (5) The holistic and integrative total force fitness framework is key to targeting resources and 
efforts and the delivery of precision care.
RTD: return to duty
Figure 19-3. The human performance optimization demands/
resources model.
and information becomes available, it can be inserted 
into the model. In addition to the resources indicated 
in Figure 19-4, other social support networks may be 
available to operational communities and commands. 
The intricacies, interactions, and intersections of how 
and what impacts performance are numerous. 
Human Performance Optimization/Total Force Fitness: A Paradigm Shift
The traditional model of care delivery is fragmented 
and illness centered. Think back to your medical training. How many courses offered allowed you to work with a 
healthy individual? What about a high-performing athlete 
where your job was to keep them performing at the top of 
their game and prevent performance degradation? The 
complexities and evolving operational needs of the 
battlefront require an approach that aids combatant 
commanders in sustaining the health, performance, 
and resiliency of their unit so performance degradation 
is minimized. In addition, each military community 
requires a tailored framework given their diverse 
mission, skill sets, and operational risks. TFF and the 
capability-focused orientation provided by HPO offer 
this conceptual framework. The instruments described 
above are powerful tools to aid in the MMO’s ability 
to deliver soldier-centric care. 
280
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
Figure 19-4. An overview of the multiple and competing individual, family, and other resources by various categories.
Role of the Military Medical Officer
The MMO is key to the successful employment of 
HPO and TFF and maximizing the health, well-being, 
and performance of the military community in which 
they serve. HPO and TFF require the MMO to assume a 
number of roles (eg, consultant, student, expert, coach, 
liaison) with a relationship built on trust and credibility. If an MMO can relate to the operational community 
on key topics and learn to see the mission through the 
service member’s eyes, they will be welcomed “into 
the fold.” Keeping service members fit and performing at their best is a high priority; thus, the following 
characteristics of the MMO are key: 
 
• being able to modulate between expert and 
student; military community cultural competency;
 
• establishing presence and role modeling; 
 
• being well versed in the language of HPO; 
 
• having a “holistic” orientation; 
 
• being skilled in adapting the TFF domains 
to fit the unique needs of each military community; and 
 
• being up to date on the latest available technologies for enhancing performance. 
Perhaps one of the most important issues is being 
a responsible leader. This demands both setting an 
example and mentoring in a team-like way. To engage 
operational service members, MMOs must be a learner 
first to understand their unique unit culture. MMOs 
must be able to listen and hear what the unit members 
see as their most critical needs. MMOs must also be 
a role model, which includes maintaining physical 
fitness, nutritional fitness, medical/dental fitness, and 
fitness for the other domains, as well as being versed 
in all other aspects of TFF and HPO. MMOs should 
281
The Evolution of Human Performance Optimization and Total Force Fitness
not tell service members what to do; rather, they must 
live the role and know where to get the information 
they seek.
An MMO’s behaviors, attitudes, and overt actions 
must demonstrate the value of health, well-being and 
HPO, but MMOs must also be able to speak and hear 
the language of the operational communities. One 
important aspect of HPO for the MMO is being able 
to listen. HPO is the end result of being proactive in 
achieving, embracing, supporting, and living the tenets and goals of TFF. The behavior and actions of an 
MMO make a statement, and that statement must be 
positive: it must resonate as: “I believe in health and 
HPO. I embrace HPO and support the TFF and HPO 
frameworks and expectations.” 
However, each unit or operational community may 
have very concrete strengths and vulnerabilities, and 
the MMO must help them identify gaps through listening and observing, not just telling. An MMO must assist 
the DoD in achieving the goal of being an enterprise 
that welcomes, supports, and promotes the framework 
that all service members and family members, retirees, 
and civilians can live and embrace the concepts and 
behaviors of TFF—a holistic framework that supports 
the culture of each unit, group, and community.
Guidance to Commanding Officer
The MMO, when in direct support of the line, functions as a special staff officer to the commander. In this 
function, the MMO serves as a subject matter expert 
in many arenas, including physical fitness, as Letterman put forth in his original mandate for the Medical 
Corps. Although the commander has the ultimate 
responsibility for what their unit does and fails to do, 
the MMO has the requirement and obligation to assist 
the commander with the execution of current relevant 
guidance. TFF is currently written into joint doctrine as 
a CJCSI 3405. 01, published on September 1, 2011. 8 This 
doctrine is authoritative and should be the principal 
resource utilized to guide the commander in assuring 
their service members are totally fit and resilient for 
combat and all other operations. Other resources can 
be found online (Exhibit 19-2).
EXHIBIT 19-2
ONLINE RESOURCES FOR HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION AND TOTAL FORCE 
FITNESS 
The websites listed below are Department of Defense (DoD) human performance optimization resources for 
service members and providers. The first two are hosted by the Consortium for Health and Military Performance 
(CHAMP), the DoD Center of Excellence for Human Performance. The third site, Military OneSource, complements 
CHAMP resources.
 
• Human Performance Resource Center (http://hprc-online.org/)
 
• Operation Supplement Safety (http:/opss.org)
 
• Military OneSource (http://www.militaryonesource.mil/) 
SUMMARY
Leaders recognized that sustained combat operations for over a decade generated the need for a new 
paradigm for understanding, developing, and assessing fitness. HPO and TFF emerged from thoughtful 
discussions and innovative actions; they reflect the 
vision and reality that people represent the military’s 
most valuable resource. Therefore, a holistic approach 
to fitness and performance must be and is the foundation for such a vision. TFF is now published in joint 
military doctrine and represents a desired end state 
for current service members and their families. HPO 
is the process whereby TFF can be achieved as knowledge, skills, and emerging technologies are leveraged 
to improve and preserve the capabilities of military 
personnel to execute essential tasks. In the execution 
of any HPO program to achieve TFF, the demands/
resources model specifically provides a framework 
with the principal concept that performance will be 
optimized when resources (individual, family, and 
external) match or exceed demands. The MMO is 
uniquely, and importantly, postured in the military 
chain of command to directly influence the shaping of a 
fit and ready force. The ultimate goal of TFF and HPO 
is not only to enhance individual and unit performance 
and wellness, but also to ensure a ready force to win 
the nation’s present and future battles. The remaining 
chapters in this section should build upon the concepts 
described here.
282
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
REFERENCES
 
1. Human Performance Modification: Review of Worldwide Research with a View to the Future. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press; 2012.
 
2. Clements BA. Medical Recollections of the Army of the Potomac by Jonathan Letterman, MD, and Memoir of Jonathan Letterman, MD. Knoxville, TN: Bohemian Brigade Publishers; 1994: 100.
 
3. Patton GS. Mechanized forces. Cavalry J. 1933;42:5-8.
 
4. Eisenhower DD. Speech to the Economic Club of New York; New York, NY; November 20, 1946. Ike Eisenhower 
Foundation. Quotes, war and defense. https://www.dwightdeisenhower.com/195/War-Defense. Accessed February 
5, 2018.
 
5. Collins JM. US Special Operations: personal opinions. Small Wars J. 2008(Dec 13).
 
6. Russell A, Bulkley B, Grafton C. Human Performance Optimization and Military Missions: Final Report, GS-10F-0297K. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Defense, Office of Net Assessment; May 2005.
 
7. Deuster PA, O’Connor FG, Henry KA, et al. Human performance optimization: an evolving charge to the Department 
of Defense. Mil Med. 2007;172(11):1133–1137.
 
8. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Chairman’s Total Force Fitness Framework. Washington, DC: JCS; 2011. CJCS Instruction 3405. 01. https://www.hprc-online.org/resources/chairman-of-the-joint-chiefs-of-staff-instruction-cjcsi. Accessed 
February 5, 2018.
 
9. Land BC. Current Department of Defense guidance for total force fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):3–5.
 10. Roy TC, Springer BA, McNulty Vl, Butler NL. Physical fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):14–20.
 11. Coulter I, Lester P, Yarvis J. Social fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):88–96.
 12. O’Connor FG, Deuster PA, DeGroot DW, White DW. Medical and environmental fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):57–64.
 13. Bates MJ, Bowles S, Hammermeister J, et al. Psychological fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):21–38.
 14. Hufford DJ, Fritts MJ, Rhodes JE. Spiritual fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):73–87.
 15. Montain SJ, Carvey CE, Stephens MB. Nutritional fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):65–72.
 16. Westphal RJ, Woodward KR. Family fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):97–102.
 17. Jonas WB, O’Connor FG, Deuster PA, Peck J, Shake C, Frost SS. Why total force fitness? Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):6–13.
 18. Bray RM, Spira JL, Olmsted KR, Hout JJ. Behavioral and occupational fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):39–56.
 19. Firth KM, Smith K. A survey of multidimensional health and fitness indexes. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):110–117.
 20. Mullen M. On total force fitness in war and peace. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):1–2.
 21. Rounds M. The principal challenge of realizing total force fitness: changing our readiness culture. Mil Med. 
2010;175(8S):124–126.
 22. Walter JA, Coulter I, Hilton L, Adler AB, Bliese PD, Nicholas RA. Program Evaluation of total force fitness programs 
in the military. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):103–109.
 23. Coulter I, Lester P, Yarvis J. Social fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175:88–96.
283
The Evolution of Human Performance Optimization and Total Force Fitness
 24. McGene J. Social Fitness and Resilience: A Review of Relevant Constructs, Measures, and Links to Well-Being. RAND Project 
Air Force Series on Resiliency. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2013. https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/
pubs/research_reports/RR100/RR108/RAND_RR108.sum.pdf. Accessed February 5, 2018.
 25. Demerouti E, Bakker AB, Nachreiner F, Schaufeli WB. The job demands-resources model of burnout. J Appl Psychol. 
2001;86(3):499–512.
 26. Bates MJ, Fallesen JJ, Huey WS, et al. Total force fitness in units, part 1: military demand-resource model. Mil Med. 
2013;178(11):1164–1182.
 27. Bakker AB, Van Emmerik H, Van Riet P. How job demands, resources, and burnout predict objective performance: a 
constructive replication. Anxiety Stress Coping. 2008;21(3):309–324.
 28. Bakker AB, Demerouti E, Euwema MC. Job resources buffer the impact of job demands on burnout. J Occup Health 
Psychol. 2005;10(2):170–180.
 29. Demerouti E, Bakker AB, Nachreiner F, Schaufeli WB. The job demands-resources model of burnout. J Appl Psychol. 
2001;86(3):499–512.
284
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
