393
Musculoskeletal Injury Prevention 
Chapter 27
MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURY 
PREVENTION
TIMOTHY C. GRIBBIN, MEd*; KATHRYN BEUTLER, BS†; and SARAH J. de la MOTTE, PhD, MPH‡
INTRODUCTION
EPIDEMIOLOGY
CURRENT MITIGATION PROGRAMS
SMART Centers
The Sports Medicine Injury Prevention Program
Developing Efforts
RISK FACTORS FOR MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURY
PREVENTION STRATEGIES
Training Modifications
Equipment Modifications
Functional Assessments
Movement Training
Components of Successful Injury Prevention Implementation Plans
MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURY AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Role of the Military Medical Officer
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
SUMMARY
*Research Associate, Injury Prevention Research Laboratory, Consortium for Health and Military Performance, Department of Military and Emergency 
Medicine, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, Maryland
†Research Assistant, Consortium for Health and Military Performance, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University, 
Bethesda, Maryland
‡Assistant Professor and Scientific Director, Injury Prevention Research Laboratory, Consortium for Health and Military Performance, Department of 
Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, Maryland
394
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION 
Musculoskeletal injury (MSK-I) is the number 
one cause of lost duty days in the US military, posing a threat to readiness and a financial burden 
on the fighting force. MSK-Is in military members 
occur during training, recreational and sporting 
activities, and occupational duties. 1 Many successful interventions have been implemented to reduce 
the burden of MSK-I in military communities by 
focusing on surveillance and education, supportive 
leadership, and training modifications. This chapter 
outlines the spectrum of MSK-I issues and discusses 
recommended steps for future prevention of MSK-I 
in the US military. Importantly, the unique role of 
the military medical officer (MMO) to help maintain 
MSK health is discussed. Terms relating to MSK-1 
are defined in Table 27-1. 
EPIDEMIOLOGY
As the largest health problem for US military service members, whether at home or abroad, MSK-I 
accounts for over 1. 95 million physician visits each 
year in the Department of Defense. This is nearly three 
times higher than the utilization for mental disorders, 
which is the second most common condition. 2 During 
deployment, nonbattle MSK-Is are the leading cause of 
air evacuation from theater, and account for 24% of all 
evacuations; combat injuries account for only 14% of 
such missions. 3 Furthermore, MSK-Is are the number 
one reason for lost duty days and contribute to the 
largest proportion of service-connected disability in 
the Department of Veterans Affairs. 4,5 Therefore, MSKIs are a burden not only during active duty, but over 
the entire lifecycle of service members. 
The vast majority of MSK-Is in the US military are 
nonbattle-related injuries, commonly occurring during recreational activity, exercise, training, and occupational events. 2 MSK-Is are also a problem during 
deployments, where approximately one in six service 
members will sustain a noncombat MSK-I sufficient 
to degrade or preclude their subsequent ability to 
perform mission duties. 3 
MSK-Is are of particular concern in training environments during the beginning of a service member’s 
career. Up to 27% of male recruits and 57% of female 
recruits sustain a training-related MSK-I during 
Army basic combat training (BCT),6 with similar rates 
across other service branches. These injuries result in 
expensive medical care, training delays, and training dropouts, which can cost more than $57,000 per 
discharged recruit. 7,8 For recruits who graduate BCT 
after sustaining an MSK-I, many are unable to complete their first term of enlistment. From 2007 to 2012, 
injuries sustained during BCT accounted for nearly 
82% of all disability-related medical discharges during 
recruits’ first year of service. 9
The most commonly diagnosed nonbattle injuries 
in both training and deployment are overuse injuries 
of the lower extremity and lumbar spine. 3,10,11 Lower 
extremity stress fractures are a common overuse injury 
during initial basic training; prevalence during this 
training has been reported to be as high as 6. 9% for 
males and 21% for females. 12 Basic training injuries 
cause tremendous force attrition: 25% of male recruits 
who sustain an injury in basic training will proceed to 
an early medical discharge. 13
The burden of MSK-I described above is a driving 
factor in physical training and has been identified as 
a top priority for program and policy interventions 
to reduce injury rates. However, knowing that physical training, during entry-level military training and 
deployment, is a primary cause of MSK-I does not 
inform program designers and policy makers as to 
why service members are being injured at such high 
rates. Identifying risk factors that predispose to these 
injuries is critical to successfully implement a strategy 
to reduce the burden of MSK-I.
CURRENT MITIGATION PROGRAMS
SMART Centers
Traditional MSK-I treatments at military sites often 
consist of 15- to 20-minute booked appointments at 
orthopedic or primary care clinics. Such visits have 
two major drawbacks: (1) primary care providers may 
not have adequate training in the evaluation of and appropriate referral for MSK-I,14 and (2) providers most 
likely do not have the requisite expertise to complete 
an MSK-I evaluation in 15 to 20 minutes, let alone create a comprehensive rehabilitation plan. 
In 2008, Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune began 
implementing Sports Medicine and Reconditioning 
(SMART) Teams at designated MSK-I clinics to (a) 
expedite return to work or duty, (b) improve healthcare satisfaction, and (c) reduce attrition of active 
duty service members. These goals must be achieved 
through targeted improved MSK-I care access, early 
395
Musculoskeletal Injury Prevention 
TABLE 27-1
KEY DEFINITIONS 
Term
Definition
Intrinsic risk factor
Aspects inherent to the individual that may predispose him or her to injury. Intrinsic risk factors 
may include demographic factors (eg, age, sex, education level, income level, marital status, occupation); anatomical characteristics; and physical fitness factors. 
Extrinsic risk factor
Conditions imposed on the individual that may cause injury. Extrinsic risk factors may include 
running mileage, training techniques, footwear and other equipment, load carried, environmental conditions, and leadership.
Modifiable risk factor
An aspect of the individual that is within their ability to change, which may also be considered 
“intrinsic,” or environmental factors that interface with the individual.
Overtraining
The point where an individual experiences a decrease and/or a plateauing in performance due to 
an imbalance in training load relative to recovery capacity.
Acute injury
Injury that occurs at a definitive time point and in response to identified, often traumatic factors 
(eg, anterior cruciate ligament tear).
Overuse injury
Injury that occurs at an imprecise time point and in response to cumulative overload rather than 
a single inciting event (eg, Achilles tendinopathy).
Functional movement 
assessment
A test or series of tests designed to measure an individual’s ability to perform athletic or workrelated physical tasks, such as squatting, lunging, or balancing on one leg. Functional movement assessments typically value movement quality (correct form) over movement quantity 
(how many reps or how much weight).
Dynamic balance
One’s ability to maintain stability as the body moves through space.
and accurate MSK-I diagnosis, and aggressive reconditioning. Primary care sports medicine-trained 
physicians, athletic trainers, and physical therapists 
provide team-based care in an open-bay configuration 
at the SMART clinics. This configuration allows for a 
large number of patients to be seen and lends itself to 
better-coordinated MSK-I care. An additional benefit 
is a decreased number of required orthopedic consults 
through early diagnosis and treatment compared 
with the traditional model. SMART centers have 
improved access to care and decreased the numbers 
of service members referred for physical evaluation 
boards. 14 
The Sports Medicine Injury Prevention Program
Between 1997 and 2001, approximately 1,100 
Marines per year were discharged from basic training due to MSK-I, with females more than twice as 
likely as males to have an MSK-I-related discharge. 
Consequently, a program to address the problem 
was implemented in Marine Corps basic training, 
the Sports Medicine Injury Prevention (SMIP) program. First initiated at Parris Island in June 2003, 
SMIP focuses on MSK-I prevention, assessment, and 
treatment using athletic trainers integrated into the 
recruit-training environment at the battalion level. 
The program has since been added at Marine Corps 
Recruit Depot San Diego and secondary training level 
sites as well. 
Central to SMIP’s success is an initiative that has 
been integrated into the Marine Corps Physical Training Instructor Course, in which drill instructors (who 
are pivotal in the physical training sessions during 
recruit training) are informed about injury prevention 
during entry-level training. SMIP has capitalized on 
this effort to become a seamless part of the regular 
training environment. 
Developing Efforts
All services are trying to develop approaches to 
minimize and mitigate MSK-I. Within the Marine 
Corps, the Force Fitness Instructor initiative is moving 
forward. Additionally, the Army has the Master Fitness Trainer program and is piloting a holistic health 
and fitness program, all of which are aimed at limiting 
MSK-I. The recommendations for implementation are 
strong, but the science of best practices requires further 
review, once programs have been implemented.
396
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
RISK FACTORS FOR MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURY
Over the past few decades, research has consistently established risk factors such as age, sex, race, 
previous injury history, and poor cardiovascular fitness for MSK-I (Table 27-2). These risk factors have 
traditionally been categorized into intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors, as defined in Table 27-1. 6,7,15 Intrinsic 
risk factors include demographics (eg, age, sex, race/
ethnicity, genetics); anatomical characteristics (eg, 
knee alignment and arch height); and physical fitness 
(eg, cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength/
endurance, and flexibility). Extrinsic risk factors 
may include running mileage, training techniques, 
footwear and other equipment, load carried, environmental conditions, and leadership. 16 However, MSK-I 
prevention strategies for training-related injuries have 
now begun to focus on whether intrinsic and extrinsic 
risk factors are “modifiable” or “nonmodifiable.” A 
modifiable risk factor is one that the individual is able 
to change, which may also be considered intrinsic 
factors, or extrinsic factors that interface with the individual. Categorization as modifiable or nonmodifiable 
allows for identifying specific risk factors amenable 
TABLE 27-2
INJURY-ASSOCIATED RISK FACTORS BY CATEGORY
Category
Risk Factor
Modifiable (M) or 
Nonmodifiable (N)
Demographic
Age > 24 years
N
Caucasian race
N
Female gender
N
Previous MSK-I
N
Tobacco use
M
Anatomical
Genu valgum
N
Q-angle > 15 degrees
N
Decreased ankle dorsiflexion
M
Rear foot hyperpronation
M
Arch extremes (pes cavus, pes planus)
M
Physical fitness
Low levels of physical activity before training
M
Low aerobic fitness
M
Extremes of flexibility
M
Low muscular strength and endurance
M
Body mass index and body composition extremes
M
MSK-I: musculoskeletal injury
Data source: de la Motte SJ, Oh R. Successful injury prevention interventions. In: Cameron KL, Owens BD, eds. Musculoskeletal Injuries in the Military. New York, NY: Springer New York; 2016: 267–286.
to change and where MSK-I prevention efforts can 
be focused. 17,18 
Although these risk factors have been consistently 
established in training settings, most are either not easily modifiable or account for only a small percentage 
of overall injury risk. For example, smoking status is 
considered to be modifiable, but it can take over one 
year for a smoker to physiologically recover from its 
effects after quitting. 19 Thus, current efforts to determine MSK-I risk and implement prevention strategies 
have shifted toward readily modifiable risk factors in 
the short term, such as assessing and correcting an 
individual’s functional movement patterns or movement strategies used to accomplish a task.
A person’s movement patterns may be key to injury 
prevention. Thus, primary prevention (prevention of 
the first injury) and secondary prevention (prevention 
of recurrent injury) may include optimizing movement patterns, correcting poor quality movement, and 
improving dynamic balance. Changing movement 
patterns is essentially improving “movement quality.” Shifting from a quantity mindset (how many 
397
Musculoskeletal Injury Prevention 
push-ups you can do) to a quality mindset (how can 
you perform a push-up in a biomechanically optimal 
way) can be challenging, but is vital for the military 
setting. 20,21 Programs addressing better neuromuscular 
control and proprioceptive and agility training have 
been shown to decrease anterior knee pain, stress 
fracture, and other lower extremity MSK-I incidence 
during military training. 7,22,23 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES
Most MSK-I prevention strategies focus on modifying the training programs, altering equipment used, 
applying specific anatomical correction techniques, 
and assessing movements. These are briefly described 
below.
Training Modifications
Careful monitoring of the training environment 
can help to decrease MSK-I risk. Excessive running 
volume during training has long been associated with 
higher rates of MSK-I in military populations,16,24,25 
and improper training advancement or “doing too 
much, too fast” is also a common cause of MSK-I 
overuse injuries in particular. In basic training, up to 
80% of lower extremity injuries suffered are overuse 
injuries, and likely attributed to low levels of baseline 
fitness among recruits, as well as doing too much too 
quickly. 1 Because many individuals entering military 
service have low fitness, graduated and interval training interventions have been implemented to increase 
baseline levels of fitness and prevent the development 
of overuse MSK-I. 7,16,22,26 Notably, decreasing running 
mileage by 40% decreased stress fracture incidence 
across Marine Corps basic training by more than 
50%,27 with minimal effects on physical fitness test 
scores (Table 27-3). 16 The reduction in stress fracture 
rates from reducing running mileage was estimated 
to save $4. 5 million in direct medical care costs and 
nearly 15,000 training days per year. 27 
In addition to total running volume, exercise frequency and duration serve a vital role in managing 
MSK-I risk during basic training, and likely during all 
physical training. Above a certain intensity, frequency, 
and duration of training, injury rates appear to increase 
markedly, whereas fitness levels change minimally 
within a certain training load range. 
Another approach to reducing MSK-I is to standardize the amount of training mileage at the division 
level. Results from military training studies strongly 
support standardizing training mileage, volume, and 
intensity as an effective way to reduce MSK-I. 28,29 The 
Army Physical Readiness Training (PRT) program 
for the 9-week BCT was designed to decrease overall 
formation running mileage, with a gradual increase 
in distance running. The PRT program standardized basic training warm-ups and physical training, 
and incorporated new evidence-based calisthenics, 
dumbbell drills, movement drills, interval training, 
and flexibility training with a progressive increase in 
repetitions and intensity. Compared to the traditional 
Army BCT physical training program, the PRT group 
had (a) a higher pass rate on first-time administration 
of the final Army physical fitness test (APFT), (b) fewer 
APFT failures, and (c) a 52% and 46% decrease in the 
overuse injury rate in males and females, respectively, 
without any deleterious effects on run times. This was 
despite running 54% fewer formation miles (17. 1 miles 
compared to 37. 2 miles). Furthermore, a significant 
decrease in time-loss overuse injuries was noted in the 
PRT group for both males (65. 8%) and females (68. 5%) 
relative to the traditional program. 29 The PRT is now an 
established policy (FM-7-2230) to standardize physical 
training for all soldiers across the Army.
TABLE 27-3
STRESS FRACTURE INCIDENCE BY MILEAGE AND RUN TIME
Marines (n)
Total Run Distance (km)
Stress Fracture Incidence (n/100)
Final 3-Mile Run Times (min)
1,136
89
3. 7
20. 3
1,117
66
2. 7
20. 7
1,097
53
1. 7
20. 9
Data source: Shaffer RA. Musculoskeletal injury project. Paper presented at: American College of Sports Medicine 43rd Annual Meeting; 
May 29–June 1, 1996; Cincinnati, OH.
398
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 27-1
GUIDANCE ON RUNNING SHOE 
SELECTION
• Replacing shoes. Buy new shoes every 3 to 6 
months. After 250 to 500 miles of use, a shoe 
loses 60% of its shock absorption.
• Cushioning. Shoes should provide cushioning 
without excessive motion control.
• Fit. Allow for plenty of “wiggle room” in the toe 
box. Above all, the shoe should be comfortable.
• Flexibility. The shoe should allow the foot to 
move in its normal motion. To test this, squeeze 
the shoe from the toe and from the heel simultaneously to bow the sole. Check that that sole 
of shoe flexes easily.
• Transitioning. Transitioning from a heel-striking gait in a heavily cushioned shoe to a mid or 
forefoot strike with a more minimalist shoe is 
a high-risk situation. Transitions should be undertaken slowly and under expert supervision.
Equipment Modifications
Although training modifications can significantly 
reduce the risk of injury, equipment modifications 
can also be important. Two approaches include footwear and ankle bracing. Footwear is one of the easiest modifications that can be made. There is limited 
evidence that selecting running shoes based on arch 
height decreases injury risk in basic training,31 but 
some evidence suggests that running shoes lose their 
shock-absorbing capabilities after 250 to 500 miles. 32 
Service members should be urged to get new running 
shoes sooner than the previously recommended 400 
to 600 miles. 33
A popular trend in runners is barefoot running or 
wearing minimalist shoes. The theory for this approach 
is that the runner’s gait is shorter than when wearing 
traditional running shoes, which leads to a midfoot or 
forefoot strike, rather than rear-foot strike. Whereas 
this should theoretically decrease the impact delivered 
to the shin, knee, and hips, the best evidence to date 
suggests that injury rates in barefoot and traditional 
runners are identical, but occur in different anatomic 
locations. Barefoot runners typically sustain injuries 
to the foot, ankle, and calf; heel strike runners suffer 
injuries to the shin, knee, and hip. 34 
Importantly, a rapid transition from traditional 
running shoes to barefoot or minimalist shoes places 
the runner at an increased risk for injury. 35 Like 
any new motor skill or physical activity, barefoot/
minimalist running is a learned skill. Changes in 
running style require strengthening the supporting 
musculature, changing flexibility patterns of antagonist musculature, and acquiring and mastering new 
movement patterns. Any transition in running style 
or shoe type ought to be gradual and careful, and 
should optimally occur under qualified supervision 
to minimize injury risk to the individual warfighter. 
Exhibit 27-1 provides basic guidance on how to select 
running shoes.
Ankle bracing is often done to minimize injuries to 
the ankle. Ankle sprains in the military occur at a rate of 
almost 35 sprains per 1,000 person-years at risk, which 
is five times higher than the rate reported in civilian 
populations. 36 Thus, ankle bracing, which has been 
shown to effectively prevent ankle injuries in several 
well-designed studies (especially in those who have 
had previous ankle sprains),37–39 is a high priority. In 
particular, there appears to be a significant benefit to 
prophylactic bracing to prevent ankle injuries during 
airborne training and operations, particularly in participants with a history of previous ankle injuries. 1,38 
Functional Assessments
Rapid and reliable screening procedures have been 
developed to screen for movement quality, and such 
screens have been employed in military environments. 
These screens include the Functional Movement Screen 
(FMS), the Landing Error Scoring System (LESS), and 
the Y-Balance Test. Although movement quality assessed by these screens has been shown to be associated with MSK-I risk in athletic populations, its role in 
MSK-I risk in military populations is questionable. 40–45 
A meta-analysis of studies that used the FMS showed 
the screen to have moderate to good specificity, but 
poor sensitivity. 46 The poor sensitivity indicates that 
a large percentage are incorrectly classified as “high 
risk” for MSK-I, despite these individuals remaining 
injury-free. Although these functional assessments 
may not be good tools for injury prediction, their 
ability to quantify movement quality may nonetheless 
be important. Movement training to improve quality 
remains a useful way to mitigate injury risk.
Movement Training
Recent efforts to implement neuromuscular training 
programs in the military are underway. The Dynamic 
Integrated Movement Enhancement (DIME) program 
was developed from prospectively identified risk 
factors for lower extremity injury. 47 DIME exercises 
require approximately 10 minutes and place a large 
emphasis on proper movement control and alignment 
399
Musculoskeletal Injury Prevention 
TABLE 27-4
SEVEN STEPS FOR AN EFFECTIVE INJURY PREVENTIVE TRAINING PROGRAM
Step
Details
1. Establish administrative support.
Gain the support of leadership, and proactively address concerns. Emphasize 
that implementing a PTP does not detract from the organization’s mission 
but reduces overall costs while simultaneously improving performance. 
Highlight how implementing a PTP measurably increases success evaluations. For example, a well-designed PTP would improve physical fitness 
as measured by the Army Physical Fitness Test and decrease attrition rates 
caused by injury.
2. Develop an interdisciplinary implementation team.
Involve key stakeholders such as program designers, trainers, athletes, 
coaches, and healthcare providers to identify and suggest possible solutions 
for all potential logistical issues that could threaten the long-term implementation of the PTP. Decide on objective criteria for achieving high-fidelity 
implementation.
3. Identify logistical barriers and solutions.
Once barriers are identified, work with the interdisciplinary team to incorporate solutions into the design and strategy.
Time
Consider the time of day, duration, and frequency of the PTP as well as any 
opportunity costs due to lost training time.
Personnel
Consider the experience and exercise of leaders and instructors and the baseline movement quality and experience of PTP participants.
Environment
Be aware of the location in which the PTP will be performed and the equipment that will be available for use.
Organization
Consider the current warm-up (or lack of warm-up) endorsed by the organization, and be sure that the program will further, or at least not impede, the 
organization’s goals.
4. Develop an evidence-based PTP.
Be sure that exercises are evidence-based and solve the injury problems of the 
organization. Finalize exercises only after working with the administration 
and team to ensure a relationship of trust, collaboration, and participation. 
Do not simply propose the adoption of a preexisting set of exercises.
5. Train the trainers and users.
Before implementation, train the trainers well so they take ownership of the 
program, feel comfortable with it, and are skilled in executing it. Provide 
verbal training on the history, efficacy, and design of the PTP. During 
hands-on training, ensure that trainers can explain the rationale behind each 
exercise, as well as perform, critique, modify, and teach each movement. 
Finally, provide materials to reinforce this information, possibly including a 
handbook of exercises, online videos, and a worksheet of common errors.
6. Ensure fidelity control.
Throughout implementation of the PTP, continue to evaluate the trainers’ 
ability and the group’s execution. Provide positive feedback and key ways to 
improve in order to foster relationships and commitment with the organization.
7. Determine exit strategy.
Once the criteria identified in step 2 are met, begin scaling back support from 
daily coaching to weekly coaching and then to sporadic visits. Continue to 
evaluate and improve the design using feedback from the interdisciplinary 
team. The goal is to create a sustainable and efficient program with longterm implementation and impact.
PTP: preventive training program
Data source: Padua DA, Frank B, Donaldson A, et al. Seven Steps for developing and implementing a preventive training program: lessons 
learned from JUMP-ACL and beyond. Clin Sports Med. 2014;33:615–632.
400
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
during nine dynamic warm-up exercises. This program reinforces the importance of proper technique 
and performance of exercises.
Components of Successful Injury Prevention 
Implementation Plans
Military units and medical treatment systems have 
several advantages over civilian and sporting populations: they are able to implement policy changes in the 
top-down military structure that result in enforced 
adoption of new practices. However, this can also be a 
barrier to adoption and maintenance of such programs 
from the bottom up. Successful evidence-based injury 
prevention interventions require extensive coordination between different stakeholders and significant 
changes in policy to ensure both adoption of the 
intervention or program and continued refining and 
monitoring to ensure program efficacy. Common barriers to program implementation, adoption, coordination, and maintenance have been formally described 
by several successful intervention teams. Table 27-4 
describes seven steps that can be taken for effective 
prevention programs. 47–49 
MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURY AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Role of the Military Medical Officer
The military medical officer (MMO) is in a unique 
position to help maintain musculoskeletal health, but 
he or she has responsibility for the health and wellness of a warfighter unit and must first build trust. 
The MMO should be engaged in supporting primary 
and secondary injury prevention, human performance 
optimization, and enhancement of physical and psychological health. MMOs are expected to provide 
the highest level of prevention and treatment with 
respect and compassion. They must also be able to 
effectively communicate and translate medical and 
scientific knowledge into actionable plans that support 
ongoing training activities and military operations. 
Building trust-based relationships is fundamental to 
this mission.
The MMO must keep in mind that physical training should be progressive; it should be graduated 
in a slow, carefully controlled manner (usually not 
more than a 10 % increase per week). Also, the MMO 
should advocate for a 7- to 10-day period where 
movement quality and progression are emphasized 
over repetition and quantity. For example, rather 
than having service members (recruits and others) 
perform the fastest run time possible and the maximum number of sit-ups or push-ups in 90 seconds, 
they should be allowed to run and do sit-ups and 
push-ups at their own pace, always emphasizing 
proper form. 
The importance of building strong relationships 
with both the unit members and the diagnostic and rehabilitative medical community cannot be overstated. 
The MMO must learn, observe, support, and get buyin from senior enlisted leaders. If the MMO believes 
in these efforts, others will listen, and MSK-I should 
decrease markedly. Senior enlisted leaders must learn 
to view injury prevention exercises as critical to maintaining readiness and becoming more resilient, not as 
a sign of weakness.
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
Despite injury prevention successes, MSK-I remains 
the largest health problem affecting military troops 
today. 3 So long as the burden of MSK-I remains high, 
commanders will have questions for MMOs regarding 
implementation and adoption of emerging prevention 
and rehabilitation initiatives. The injury prevention 
principles described above can form the foundation for 
command recommendations. The MMO should use 
those principles, accompanied by current statistics in 
their units and facts from the literature to frame key 
recommendations to military line leaders. The key 
principles noted previously include
 
• training modifications (“more is not always 
better”);
 
• equipment modifications (new gadgets constantly appear on the market, so demand 
and rely on comprehensive data rather than 
testimonials or anecdotes); and
 
• functional movement screening (best for use 
when developing a treatment program, not 
for predicting injury).
If no good data are available, and the commander 
is determined to use a new device or program, contact Uniformed Services University’s CHAMP Injury 
Prevention Research Laboratory to help design and 
conduct a study to evaluate risks and benefits of the 
proposed device or program. More information about 
injury and injury prevention can be found at the Human Performance Resource Center (hprc-online.org).
401
Musculoskeletal Injury Prevention 
SUMMARY
Injury prevention in the military has had numerous successes over the years and has benefitted 
from lessons learned along the way. Despite these 
successes, however, risk factors for MSK-I-related 
discharge from basic training stubbornly persists,50 
and low entry physical fitness levels are still one 
of the strongest predictors of MSK-I risk during all 
forms of training. 28,50,51 MSK-I prevention interventions have primarily focused on specific strategies 
or systems to address the problem, with policy also 
aiding efforts. Through the use of secondary prevention and system approaches, successfully preventing 
MSK-I in the military is a known force multiplier. 
Prevention of overtraining, utilization of ankle 
bracing, and targeted neuromuscular training have 
all proven effective in injury prevention in several 
military populations. Furthermore, the military’s 
structure can be advantageous in the implementation 
of any injury-prevention intervention, but leadership 
support is still needed for successful integration and 
long-term results. Finally, for behavioral interventions to be sustainable, strategies to encourage voluntary adoption in the target population will likely 
be necessary.
REFERENCES
 
1. Bullock SH, Jones BH, Gilchrist J, Marshall SW. Prevention of physical training-related injuries recommendations for the 
military and other active populations based on expedited systematic reviews. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38(1 Suppl):S156–181.
 
2. Jones BH, Canham-Chervak M, Canada S, Mitchener TA, Moore S. Medical surveillance of injuries in the U.S. military: 
descriptive epidemiology and recommendations for improvement. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38(1 Suppl):S42–S60.
 
3. Hauret KG, Taylor BJ, Clemmons NS, Block SR, Jones BH. Frequency and causes of nonbattle injuries air evacuated 
from operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom, U.S. Army, 2001-2006. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38(1 Suppl):S94–107.
 
4. US Department of Veterans Affairs. Veterans Benefits Administration Annual Benefits Report Fiscal Year 2015. Washington, 
DC: VA; 2016. 
 
5. Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center. Absolute and relative morbidity burdens attributable to various illnesses 
and injuries, U.S. armed forces, 2014. MSMR. 2015;22(4):27–34.
 
6. Jones BH, Knapik JJ. Physical training and exercise-related injuries. Surveillance, research and injury prevention in 
military populations. Sports Med. 1999;27(2):111–125.
 
7. Molloy JM, Feltwell DN, Scott SJ, Niebuhr DW. Physical training injuries and interventions for military recruits. Mil 
Med. 2012;177(5):553–558.
 
8. Niebuhr DW, Scott CT, Powers TE, et al. Assessment of recruit motivation and strength study: preaccession physical 
fitness assessment predicts early attrition. Mil Med. 2008;173(6):555–562.
 
9. Gubata ME, Boivin MR, Cowan DN, et al. Attrition & Morbidity Data for 2012 Accessions Annual Report 2013. Silver 
Spring, MD: Accession Medical Standards Analysis & Research Activity, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research; 
2013.
 10. Ruscio BA, Jones BH, Bullock SH, et al. A process to identify military injury prevention priorities based on injury type 
and limited duty days. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38(1 Suppl):S19–33.
 11. Patel AA, Hauret KG, Taylor BJ, Jones BH. Non-battle injuries among U.S. Army soldiers deployed to Afghanistan 
and Iraq, 2001–2013. J Safety Res. 2017;60:29–34.
 12. Jones BH, Thacker SB, Gilchrist J, Kimsey CD Jr, Sosin DM. Prevention of lower extremity stress fractures in athletes 
and soldiers: a systematic review. Epidemiol Rev. 2002;24(2):228–247.
 13. Knapik JJ, Sharp MA, Canham-Chervak M, Hauret K, Patton JF, Jones BH. Risk factors for training-related injuries 
among men and women in basic combat training. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33(6):946–954.
402
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 14. Brawley S, Fairbanks K, Nguyen W, Blivin S, Frantz E. Sports medicine training room clinic model for the military. 
Mil Med. 2012;177(2):135–138.
 15. Altarac M, Gardner JW, Popovich RM, Potter R, Knapik JJ, Jones BH. Cigarette smoking and exercise-related injuries 
among young men and women. Am J Prev Med. 2000;18(3 Suppl):96–102.
 16. Knapik JJ, Hauret KG, Jones BH. Primary prevention of injuries in initial entry training. In: DeKoning B, ed. Recruit 
Medicine. Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, Department of the Army, Borden Institute; 2006: 125–146.
 17. Bahr R, Holme I. Risk factors for sports injuries—a methodological approach. Br J Sports Med. 2003;37(5):384–392.
 18. Cameron KL. Commentary: time for a paradigm shift in conceptualizing risk factors in sports injury research. J Athl 
Train. 2010;45(1):58–60.
 19. World Health Organization. Fact sheet about health benefits of smoking cessation. http://www.who.int/tobacco/
quitting/en_tfi_quitting_fact_sheet.pdf. Accessed June 13, 2016.
 20. de la Motte SJ, Gribbin TC, Lisman P, Beutler AI, Deuster P. The interrelationship of common clinical movement screens: 
establishing population-specific norms in a large cohort of military applicants. J Athl Train. 2016;51(11):897–904.
 21. de la Motte SJ, Lisman P, Sabatino M, Beutler AI, O’Connor FG, Deuster PA. The relationship between functional 
movement, balance deficits, and previous injury history in deploying marine warfighters. J Strength Cond Res. 
2016;30(6):1619–1625.
 22. Brushoj C, Larsen K, Albrecht-Beste E, Nielsen MB, Loye F, Holmich P. Prevention of overuse injuries by a concurrent exercise program in subjects exposed to an increase in training load: a randomized controlled trial of 1020 army 
recruits. Am J Sports Med. 2008;36(4):663–670.
 23. Coppack RJ, Etherington J, Wills AK. The effects of exercise for the prevention of overuse anterior knee pain: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Sports Med. 2011;39(5):940–948.
 24. Jones BH, Cowan DN, Tomlinson JP, Robinson JR, Polly DW, Frykman PN. Epidemiology of injuries associated with 
physical training among young men in the army. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1993;25(2):197–203.
 25. Jones BH, Cowan DN, Knapik JJ. Exercise, training and injuries. Sports Med. 1994;18(3):202–214.
 26. Sherrard J, Lenne M, Cassell E, Stokes M, Ozanne-Smith J. Injury prevention during physical activity in the Australian 
Defence Force. J Sci Med Sport. 2004;7(1):106–117.
 27. Shaffer RA. Musculoskeletal injury project. Paper presented at: American College of Sports Medicine 43rd Annual 
Meeting; May 29–June 1, 1996; Cincinnati, OH.
 28. Trank TV, Ryman DH, Minagawa RY, Trone DW, Shaffer RA. Running mileage, movement mileage, and fitness in 
male U.S. Navy recruits. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33(6):1033–1038.
 29. Knapik JJ, Hauret KG, Arnold S, et al. Injury and fitness outcomes during implementation of physical readiness training. Int J Sports Med. 2003;24(5):372–381.
 30. Department of the Army. Army Physical Readiness Training. Washington, DC: HQDA; 2012. FM 7-22.
 31. Knapik JJ, Trone DW, Tchandja J, Jones BH. Injury-reduction effectiveness of prescribing running shoes on the basis 
of foot arch height: summary of military investigations. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2014;44(10):805–812.
 32. Cook SD, Kester MA, Brunet ME. Shock absorption characteristics of running shoes. Am J Sports Med. 1985;13(4):248–253.
 33. Teyhen DS, Thomas RM, Roberts CC, et al. Awareness and compliance with recommended running shoe guidelines 
among U.S. Army soldiers. Mil Med. 2010;175(11):847–854.
403
Musculoskeletal Injury Prevention 
 34. Daoud AI, Geissler GJ, Wang F, Saretsky J, Daoud YA, Lieberman DE. Foot strike and injury rates in endurance runners: a retrospective study. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44(7):1325–1334.
 35. Cauthon DJ, Langer P, Coniglione TC. Minimalist shoe injuries: three case reports. Foot (Edinb). 2013;23(2-3):100–103.
 36. Cameron KL, Owens BD, DeBerardino TM. Incidence of ankle sprains among active-duty members of the United 
States Armed Services from 1998 through 2006. J Athl Train. 2010;45(1):29–38.
 37. Schumacher JT Jr, Creedon JF, Pope RW. The effectiveness of the parachutist ankle brace in reducing ankle injuries in 
an airborne ranger battalion. Mil Med. 2000;165(12):944–948.
 38. Knapik JJ, Spiess A, Swedler DI, Grier TL, Darakjy SS, Jones BH. Systematic review of the parachute ankle brace: injury 
risk reduction and cost effectiveness. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38(1 Suppl):S182–188.
 39. Sitler M, Ryan J, Wheeler B, et al. The efficacy of a semirigid ankle stabilizer to reduce acute ankle injuries in basketball. 
A randomized clinical study at West Point. Am J Sports Med. 1994;22(4):454–461.
 40. Kiesel K, Plisky P, Butler R. Functional movement test scores improve following a standardized off-season intervention program in professional football players. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2011;21:287–292.
 41. Padua DA, Marshall SW, Boling MC, Thigpen CA, Garrett WE Jr, Beutler AI. The Landing Error Scoring System (LESS) 
is a valid and reliable clinical assessment tool of jump-landing biomechanics: The JUMP-ACL study. Am J Sports Med. 
2009;37(10):1996–2002.
 42. Boling MC, Padua DA, Marshall SW, Guskiewicz K, Pyne S, Beutler A. A prospective investigation of biomechanical 
risk factors for patellofemoral pain syndrome: the Joint Undertaking to Monitor and Prevent ACL Injury (JUMP-ACL) 
cohort. Am J Sports Med. 2009;37(11):2108–2116.
 43. Shaffer SW, Teyhen DS, Lorenson CL, et al. Y-balance test: a reliability study involving multiple raters. Mil Med. 
2013;178(11):1264–1270.
 44. Teyhen DS, Shaffer SW, Lorenson CL, et al. The Functional Movement Screen: a reliability study. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2012;42(6):530–540.
 45. Teyhen DS, Shaffer SW, Lorenson CL, et al. Reliability of lower quarter physical performance measures in healthy 
service members. US Army Med Dep J. 2011(Jul-Sep):37–49.
 46. Dorrel BS, Long T, Shaffer S, Myer GD. Evaluation of the Functional Movement Screen as an injury prediction tool 
among active adult populations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Health. 2015;7(6):532–537.
 47. Padua DA, Frank B, Donaldson A, et al. Seven Steps for developing and implementing a preventive training program: 
lessons learned from JUMP-ACL and beyond. Clin Sports Med. 2014;33:615–632.
 48. Finch CF. No longer lost in translation: the art and science of sports injury prevention implementation research. Br J 
Sports Med. 2011;45(16):1253–1257.
 49. Donaldson A, Finch CF. Applying implementation science to sports injury prevention. Br J Sports Med. 2013;47(8):473–
475.
 50. Swedler DI, Knapik JJ, Williams KW, Grier TL, Jones BH. Risk factors for medical discharge from United States Army 
Basic Combat Training. Mil Med. 2011;176(10):1104–1110.
 51. Trone DW, Cipriani DJ, Raman R, Wingard DL, Shaffer RA, Macera CA. The association of self-reported measures 
with poor training outcomes among male and female U.S. Navy recruits. Mil Med. 2013;178(1):43–49.
 
404
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
