35
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
Chapter 3
OFFICERSHIP AND THE PROFESSION 
OF ARMS IN THE 21ST CENTURY
ISAIAH WILSON III, PhD,* and MICHAEL J. MEESE, PhD†
INTRODUCTION
THE OFFICER’S OATH AND COMMISSION
THE ROLES OF AN OFFICER 
Warrior-Leader in the Profession of Arms
Member of a Profession
Servant of the Nation
Leader of Character
CIVIL-MILITARY RELATIONS AND SOCIETY TODAY
The ”Unequal Dialogue” and the All-Volunteer Force
The Military Profession and the Defense Bureaucracy
Role of Professional Officers—Even After Retirement
TYPES OF SPECIALIZED EXPERTISE
The Army: Obedient Servant Emphasizing People
The Air Force: Victory Through Technology
The Navy: Independent Exercise of Sovereignty
The Marine Corps: The Nation’s Force of Choice
Special Operations: The “Quiet Professionals”
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Aviation, US Army; Senior Lecturer of Global Affairs, Jackson Institute for Global Affairs, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 
†Brigadier General (Retired), Professor, US Military Academy, US Army; Executive Vice President of American Armed Forces Mutual Aid Association, 
Fort Myer, Virginia 
36
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The military medical officer (MMO) is distinct 
from other medical professionals because of his or 
her unique role as an officer in the profession of arms. 
While most of an MMO’s training, and indeed most of 
this book, concentrates on the development of MMOs 
as medical professionals, this chapter describes their 
unique position as military officers and the added roles 
and responsibilities they accept as commissioned officers in the US armed forces.
This chapter builds on the history of the origins of 
the officer, which was introduced in Chapter 1, The 
History of the Military Medical Officer, by explaining 
the importance of officership, which is derived from 
the military commission. It then explains the four roles 
of an officer and how those roles distinguish military 
officers from others in society. Given this understanding of officers, the chapter briefly describes some of 
the particular challenges in civil-military relations that 
affect an officer’s role in the profession of arms in the 
21st century. Finally, the chapter discusses the distinctive nature of the specialized expertise of each of the 
“subprofessions” within the profession of arms—the 
Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and Special 
Operations Forces. 
THE OFFICER’S OATH AND COMMISSION
Examining the profession of arms begins with the 
commissioning oath of the armed forces officer and 
the meanings of that commission. The commission is 
the encapsulation and embodiment of the long history, 
theories, and core value-based guiding and governing 
principles of the armed services professional ethos and 
the professional practices of the commissioned officer. 
The oath that all officers take upon commissioning is:
I will support and defend the Constitution of the 
United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the 
same; that I take this obligation freely, without any 
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I 
will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office upon which I am about to enter; So help me God. 1
Several aspects of the oath are distinctive, including both what is included and what is omitted. This is 
probably best illustrated by comparing the oath with 
that which is taken by enlisted members of the armed 
forces, which is:
I will support and defend the Constitution of the 
United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the 
same; and that I will obey the orders of the President 
of the United States and the orders of the officers appointed over me, according to regulations and the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice. So help me God. 1
The focus of both oaths is the support and defense 
of the Constitution—not service to the president, any 
political party, and certainly not a monarch, as it might 
be in other nations. The oaths require “true faith and 
allegiance,” to the Constitution, which may seem obvious today, but was less so during the Revolutionary 
War and the American Civil War. 
The officer oath is distinctive in three important 
ways. First, unlike the enlisted oath, it does not mention “that I will obey the orders of the President of the 
United States and the orders of the officers appointed 
over me, according to regulations . . .” Officers are 
selected and commissioned because they have specialized expertise to make decisions in the profession of 
arms, which is the application of violence on behalf of 
the nation. The commission explains that the president 
of the United States has reposed “special trust and 
confidence in the patriotism, valor, fidelity, and abilities” of each officer to use those abilities to act with 
discretion on behalf of the nation. 
Second, officers state they “take this obligation 
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of 
evasion.” Enlisted soldiers have no such requirement. 
When America had a military draft, many draftees performed their service, but may not have done so freely 
or without mental reservation. Officers who could 
not accept their obligation “freely without any mental 
reservation” could resign their commission and serve 
in the enlisted ranks to fulfill their military obligation. 
Finally, officers affirmatively state that they “will 
well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office 
upon which I am about to enter.” This requires a 
specialized knowledge of and training for the “duties 
of the office” so that they can be “well and faithfully” 
discharged. Officers must act in unclear and uncertain 
situations where there may not be specific orders about 
what to do from the president or the chain of command; at these times they must be able to serve in the 
best manner possible to support and defend the nation.
Military historian S.L.A. Marshall wrote the first and 
classic edition of Armed Forces Officer in 1950, reflecting his thoughts and philosophical guidance on the 
attitudes, conduct, standards, and duty for officers of 
the United States. He explained (at the time, women 
37
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
comprised only 1. 5% of the military, and it was common to use only the masculine pronoun):
Upon being commissioned in the Armed Services of 
the United States, a man incurs a lasting obligation to 
cherish and protect his country and to develop within himself that capacity and reserve strength which 
will enable him to serve its arms and the welfare of 
his fellow Americans with increasing wisdom, diligence, and patriotic conviction. 
This is the meaning of the commission. It is not 
modified by any reason of assignment while in service, nor is the obligation lessened on the day an officer puts the uniform aside and returns to civilian 
life. Having been specially chosen by the United 
States to sustain the dignity and integrity of its sovereign power, an officer is expected so to maintain himself, and so to exert his influence as a worthy symbol 
of all that is best in the national character. 2
This obligation is what distinguishes an officer in 
the armed forces from other members of society. Once 
an officer has received the trust of the nation through 
the commission, executing this special responsibility in 
practice is what is meant by officership. This practice, 
unique and even peculiar in its expertise and functions, 
is inspired by a unique professional identity that is 
further shaped by what an officer must BE, KNOW, 
and DO. In this sense, officership is a matter of both 
personal identity (character) and specialized expertise 
(knowledge and experience).
THE ROLES OF AN OFFICER
In 2007, the Department of Defense published an 
updated version of The Armed Forces Officer. 3 This effort 
was the culmination of nearly a decade of research, 
study, and discussion about officership and the profession of arms that took place at the service academies, 
at war colleges, and within the joint staff. 3–5 This book 
captured and described four key roles for the military 
officer: (1) warrior-leader in the profession of arms, (2) 
member of a profession, (3) servant of the nation, and 
(4) leader of character. Understanding each of these 
roles is important because together they comprise the 
key aspects of officership.
Warrior-Leader in the Profession of Arms
The primary reason to commission officers is because the nation needs individuals with specialized 
expertise to selectively and discriminately administer 
violence on behalf of the state. “The defining mission of 
the armed forces is the preparation for and the conduct 
of war, which includes securing military victory until 
peace is restored politically.”3(p12) Regardless of the 
specific branch of service or role within that branch, the 
preeminent role of an officer is that of a warrior-leader 
in the profession of arms. It is this unique role that 
distinguishes officers from members of all other professions and places particular responsibilities on them.
The profession of arms is unique because of the 
lethality of the organizations officers lead and the 
ultimate responsibility they have over life and death, 
which can affect success or failure for American national security. As James Toner wrote, “The preeminent military task, and what separates [the military 
profession] from all other occupations, is that soldiers 
are routinely prepared to kill. . . . In addition to killing and preparing to kill, the soldier has two other 
principal duties. . . . Some soldiers die and, when 
they are not dying, they must be preparing to die.”6 
By serving in the military, all soldiers, sailors, airmen, 
and marines have committed to unlimited liability 
in service on behalf of the nation, even to the point 
of dying for their country. General Sean MacFarland 
explained, “The words ‘to kill and die’ are as central 
to the profession of arms as ‘to serve and protect’ are 
to the law enforcement profession, or ‘equal justice 
under the law’ are to the legal profession.”7 Military 
officers are leaders of the profession that prosecutes 
violence on behalf of the nation and whose members 
may die as a tragic, but normal, consequence of their 
professional calling.
The fact that officers’ decisions may ultimately affect 
life and death reinforces the paramount importance 
of developing and maintaining specialized professional expertise. For an officer, this is not merely being 
proficient on a specific skill such as firing a weapon, 
flying an aircraft, or operating a naval vessel; rather, 
it means actively pursuing greater understanding of 
the broader, abstract knowledge of the profession. The 
essence of warfighting is engagement with a dynamic, 
uncertain enemy, and the study, discussion, and 
practice of warfare is the responsibility of the professional officer, so that he or she is prepared to make 
critical decisions upon which life or death and victory or defeat may depend. This is equally important 
for officers in all specialties. The logistics officer who 
determines supply rates, transportation options, and 
maintenance practices, and the medical officer who 
coordinates illness prevention, casualty care, evacuation procedures, and hospital locations—each must do 
so from a depth of expert knowledge of warfighting 
and their own specialty, honed from a career of study 
and professional practice. 
38
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Officership includes not just being a member of 
the profession of arms, but also being a leader in the 
profession. Chapter 4, Military Medical Leadership, 
discusses leadership in more detail, but in the context 
of the warrior ethos, military officers must be capable 
of providing not only effective decisions, but also the 
inspirational winning spirit for their unit in combat. 
To do so requires significant preparation in all aspects 
of the human experience—physically, intellectually, 
and morally. 8 The essence of warrior-leadership is to 
inspire others to action, frequently doing things that 
are challenging, dangerous, and perhaps against their 
own personal interest and safety. “Organizing, mobilizing, motivating, justifying, indeed inspiring others 
are essential talents for the officer in the profession of 
arms.”3(p17) 
With the high-quality service members who comprise the all-volunteer force, it is not enough to give a 
rousing speech like a coach before a big game. Soldiers, 
sailors, airmen, and marines must be convinced that 
their officers have: 
 
• the intellectual skills to properly understand 
war’s complexity and assiduously evaluate 
courses of action; 
 
• the physical courage and stamina to lead them 
at the most challenging times; and 
 
• the moral courage to always make the best 
possible decisions that maximize the chance 
of mission success. 
Member of a Profession
An officer is not only a warrior-leader, but also 
has responsibilities as a member of a profession. 
Samuel Huntington explained that, “The modern 
officer corps is a professional body and the modern 
military officer [is] a professional . . . . The distinguishing characteristic[s] of a profession as a special 
type of vocation are its expertise, responsibility, and 
corporateness.”9 MMOs are simultaneously members 
of both the military profession and the medical profession, and the attributes of expertise, responsibility, and corporateness apply to both professions. All 
three elements must be present for practitioners to be 
members of a profession. Expertise without the other 
two components is a specialized occupation without 
ethical standards or self-enforced accountability. Each 
of these characteristics will be discussed in turn. It is 
useful to think about the implications and challenges 
of being members of two professions simultaneously.
Expertise is important to professions because society collectively determines that it must trust a body 
of individuals—a profession—to develop, promote, 
learn, and practice a specific body of knowledge on 
behalf of all citizens. The Armed Forces Officer explains: 
Working as a professional involves responding to diverse and highly contextual problems requiring continued delivery of a quality service of a discretionary 
character. This contrasts sharply with the bureaucrat’s routine response by rule to generally similar 
tasks. Application of an educated discretionary judgment is the real skill of the professional. 3(p22) 
The specialized expertise for the military officer 
is warfighting or one of its subspecialties, such as 
ground combat, air combat, naval combat, or amphibious warfare (discussed later in this chapter). For the 
medical doctor, the specialized expertise is medicine, 
including preventive medicine, primary care, cardiology, or orthopedics. In each case, the profession and 
professionals commit significant resources to developing new expert knowledge in their respective areas, 
maintaining or updating that knowledge in a dynamic 
scholarly environment, and promulgating that knowledge through professional journals, professional education, and professional associations. Society defers to 
medical doctors and military officers the life-and-death 
decisions. Their environment ranges from an operating 
room to the battlefield, and the expectation is that, as 
members of a profession, they have been certified in 
their abilities to practice medicine and are continually 
striving to improve their expert knowledge to apply 
to new, complex, and uncertain situations.
Just as professions are granted discretionary authority to act on behalf of society in their professional 
practice, they have a responsibility to do so in a way 
that continues to sustain the public trust. These responsibilities are generally codified by the profession 
in a written canon of ethics or code of conduct. For a 
doctor or officer to violate their professional responsibility is normally considered much more serious 
than if they make a reasonable error in judgment 
in applying specialized expertise, or when a known 
complication ensues from accepted therapeutics. The 
widespread public outcry when a scandal occurs at 
a service academy, or when an officer violates their 
professional responsibilities, reflects the seriousness 
with which the public regards an officer’s dereliction of 
duty. It is a violation of the trust society has placed in 
the profession. Ultimately, if the profession continues 
to fail in its professional responsibility, society, often 
through its elected leaders in Congress, will investigate 
and curtail some of the discretion previously granted 
to the profession. For example, Congress recently reviewed military law and justice after a series of sexual 
assaults in the military. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand 
proposed a law to limit the professional jurisdiction of 
39
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
military commanders and prevent them from deciding 
whether to prosecute in cases of sexual assault. Her 
proposed law would have changed this jurisdiction 
to military lawyers—another distinct profession—to 
address the perceived problems in judgment among 
military commanders. 10 
Finally, members of a profession share a sense 
of corporate self-identity and think of themselves 
as a group set apart from other groups and society 
at large. “Professions are exclusive, self-conscious, 
functional collectivities or subcultures entrusted by 
society to perform or regulate performance of important functions.”6(p26) This is because of their specialized 
expertise and specific responsibilities, as well as the 
long period of education and stringent requirements 
for admission into the profession. Each profession establishes and maintains the standards of the profession 
among its members, promotes education about the 
guiding ethos of the profession, and takes responsibility to discipline or expel any member who has violated 
professional standards. Indeed, officers are generally 
trained, educated, mentored, socialized, evaluated, 
and eventually promoted by other officers within the 
profession. This distinctiveness of being a member of 
a profession, characterized by expertise, responsibility, 
and corporateness, is a fundamental part of officership.
As a member of two professions, the MMO has 
an interesting challenge. Assuming they meet the 
standards of each profession and can maintain their 
requisite specialized expertise, MMOs are often 
wrongly presumed to face a choice between whether 
the medical or military profession will dominate their 
self-identity. In reality, the two professions are rarely 
in conflict, and astute members of both professions 
strive to shape professional jurisdictions so that they 
do not come in conflict. However, there are occasions 
when an MMO must choose the self-identity that 
is appropriate to an unusual situation: the medical 
profession when caring for the individual patient, or 
the military profession when planning battles or putting the health and welfare of the whole unit over the 
welfare of the individual service member. Sometimes 
the choice is not obvious, and MMOs must ask themselves, “Who am I?” 
Servant of the Nation
An officer in the US armed forces has particular 
responsibilities as a servant of the nation. These are 
based on the US Constitution and the unique national 
history that has evolved and developed since the 
American Revolution. Although it can conjure up images of slavery or subordination, the self-abnegating 
concept of “servant” is essential to officership: officers 
voluntarily choose to subordinate their own personal 
desires to that of the nation. This fiduciary obligation 
is the foundation of the professional ethos of the military officer—and of the physician. It is not about the 
officer, it is about their unit, and ultimately about the 
nation. This concept has several formulations. The Air 
Force describes it as “Service before self.” The Navy 
describes it as “Ship, shipmate, self.” The US Military 
Academy’s motto is “Duty, honor, country.” The role 
as a servant of society is reinforced when members of 
a grateful nation say, “Thank you for your service.” 
Officers must recognize that they are servants in a 
cause greater than themselves.
This cause is based on the oath of office and the 
Constitution, as discussed previously. Although officers work for the president as commander-in-chief, the 
Constitution specifies that officers must be confirmed 
by Congress, which is also given the duty “To raise 
and support Armies; To provide and maintain a Navy; 
To make rules for the government and regulation of 
the land and naval forces.”11 When officers testify 
before Congress during confirmation hearings, they 
are nearly always asked and respond affirmatively to 
the question, “Will you always provide your personal 
and honest opinion directly to Congress, even if it is in 
conflict with that of the president and the administration?” As a servant of the nation, officers are responsible to all branches of government and indeed to the 
nation as a whole.
This role is particularly American because its history dates to George Washington. As commanderin-chief of the Revolutionary Army that defeated the 
British, and with the widespread respect throughout 
the colonies that eventually made him America’s first 
president, George Washington had immense popularity and power. In the waning days of the American 
Revolution, Congress had failed to provide sufficient 
funds for the Army. A group of officers encamped 
in Newburgh, New York, threatened to deliver an 
ultimatum to Congress with a thinly veiled threat 
of a military takeover. Washington certainly had his 
challenges with Congress, and he could easily have 
ridden the Army’s passions and power to an unparalleled position of domination in the fledgling nation. 
Instead, he quelled the potential mutiny with a famous 
speech that properly placed the military subordinate 
to civilian authority in Congress: 
Let me entreat you, Gentlemen, on your part, not to 
take any measures, which viewed in the calm light 
of reason, will lessen the dignity, and sully the glory 
you have hitherto maintained; let me request you to 
rely on the plighted faith of your Country, and place 
a full confidence in the purity of the intentions of 
Congress; . . . [I implore you] to express your utmost 
40
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
horror and detestation of the Man who wishes, under any specious pretenses, to overturn the liberties 
of our Country, and who wickedly attempts to open 
the flood Gates of Civil discord, and deluge our rising Empire in Blood. 12
Washington set the preeminent example of why 
and how the American military must be subordinate 
to civil authority. 
The officer’s role as a servant of the nation is enshrined in both law and practice. For example, federal 
law requires that an officer must be retired for 7 years 
before becoming secretary of defense or 5 years before 
becoming a service secretary. 13 This minimizes the 
likelihood that a general or admiral would assume 
a civilian leadership position in the Department of 
Defense, or at least requires congressional exception 
for them to do so. (This law has only been waived 
in the cases of General George Marshall in 1950 and 
General Jim Mattis in 2017.) These provisions help 
guard against the temptation for popular and powerful military leaders to subvert civilian control amid a 
public crisis or otherwise.
Subordination to civilian control is fulfilled in 
practice when military leaders are removed from office. In 1951, General Douglas MacArthur challenged 
President Truman’s policies in the Korean War, sending his objections in a letter to Congress. MacArthur’s 
letter directly violated the president’s directives and 
led to President Truman’s relieving MacArthur from 
command on April 11, 1951. “The issue at stake was no 
less than the continuation of civilian supremacy and 
of the President’s authority as commander-in-chief.”14 
More recently, in 2010, when a magazine article about 
General Stanley McChrystal, commander of US and 
international forces in Afghanistan, included disparaging statements about Obama administration officials, 
President Obama asked General McChrystal to resign. 
It is interesting to note that: 
McChrystal and his staff were not criticized for their 
lack of military competence, for their dissent over 
policy, or for failure to implement strategy. Their 
professionalism—especially those professional competencies related to understanding the roles and responsibilities of military leaders vis-à-vis the civilian 
political leadership in the context of democratic civilmilitary relations—was found wanting. 15
Both cases led to debate about whether the actions 
justified the president’s relieving a senior commander 
in wartime, but nearly all civilian and military analysts 
agree that professional officers have a special responsibility as a servant of the nation to conform to the standards and traditions of civilian control of the military.
Leader of Character
Officers must be leaders of character because their 
most important actions are frequently performed 
with limited oversight. They must have ingrained the 
internal ethical standards to make the right decisions 
every time. Character is inextricably linked to decisionmaking because the choices officers make often reveal 
their underlying character. Every pre-commissioning 
source is replete with examples for cadets and midshipmen to understand and internalize to help them 
develop a moral core as officers. The Armed Forces Officer examined the themes emphasized in each branch 
of service and found that several common themes 
emerged: honor, respect, duty, service, excellence, 
courage, commitment, loyalty, and integrity. While 
the specific terminology may vary, these attributes 
must become part of an officer’s self-identity so that 
they have the moral compass to lead themselves and 
their subordinates.
Individually, officers must have the character to understand, confront, and overcome challenging moral/
ethical decisions because of the position of trust they 
are in. Decisions can be as inconsequential as “fudging” the numbers on a bothersome report to higher 
headquarters or as important as deciding which of 
several bad options will minimize the risk of death to 
subordinates in combat. Being a leader of character 
means not only making the right decision, but also 
being able to do so without becoming paralyzed by the 
situation. Officers are in a special position of trust and 
responsibility because they have the specialized skills 
to gather and evaluate critical information needed for 
decision-making, coupled with the character to make 
difficult decisions on behalf of their client—the nation 
that has commissioned them. 
Collectively, subordinates are not likely to follow 
officers who eschew their moral compass when things 
get tough. Being a leader of character sets the example 
and establishes a culture for an officer’s unit. Having the physical courage to lead a platoon on a route 
strewn with roadside bombs is important, but so is 
standing up for what is right in the Pentagon, even 
if it contradicts conventional wisdom or bureaucratic 
politics. Character includes recognizing and respecting 
the value of all members of the team and striving to 
maximize the contribution of each individual, while 
enforcing the standards of military training and behavior. Character is also involved in refraining from 
engaging in partisan political activities or publicly expressing political opinions that undermine the authority of elected civilian leaders. Officers are always “on 
parade,” with subordinates assiduously watching to 
identify a lapse in character. This is why officers must 
41
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
be vigilant against threats to their integrity. Integrity 
may be difficult to maintain, but it is immensely more 
difficult to regain if it is lost.
Character must be internalized as officers are preparing to be commissioned. It was therefore appropriate that, in 1924, the US Military Academy codified 
many aspects of an officer’s character in the words of 
the Cadet Prayer. These words were spoken weekly by 
nearly all cadets (at least until mandatory chapel ended 
in 1972) and reflect a nondenominational recitation of 
moral precepts that are important to officership:
Strengthen and increase our admiration for honest 
dealing and clean thinking, and suffer not our hatred 
of hypocrisy and pretense ever to diminish. 
Encourage us in our endeavor to live above the common level of life. 
Make us to choose the harder right instead of the easier wrong, and never to be content with a half-truth 
when the whole can be won. 
Endow us with courage that is born of loyalty to all 
that is noble and worthy, that scorns to compromise 
with vice and injustice and knows no fear when truth 
and right are in jeopardy. 
Guard us against flippancy and irreverence in the sacred things of life. 
Grant us new ties of friendship and new opportunities of service. 
Kindle our hearts in fellowship with those of a cheerful countenance, and soften our hearts with sympathy for those who sorrow and suffer. 16
Having officers recite many of the attributes they 
need to become leaders of character is an important 
developmental activity, irrespective of religious affiliation or nonaffiliation.
CIVIL-MILITARY RELATIONS AND SOCIETY TODAY
As part of the military profession, officers must be 
aware of many of the perennial discussions concerning the appropriate role of the military in society. This 
section surveys some of the most important issues 
officers will confront throughout their careers. The 
American polity was conceived by statesmen who 
deeply mistrusted standing armies, were suspicious 
of any insufficiently bridled aggregation of power, 
and believed in the power of citizens as the ultimate 
authority. 17 Effective arrangements of shared power 
through the design of separate and separable institutional structural ways, means, and mechanisms are 
essential to American citizens’ relationship with power 
and governance. 18 American civil-military relations 
are no different. 
The history of American civil-military relations, 
like many things American, is rife with paradox. 
While maintaining a baseline anti-military undertone 
throughout its history, the country has often turned 
to the military as a touchstone for core national ideals 
in times of ambiguity, has periodically considered 
military heroes as presidential candidates, and has 
occasionally used the military as a laboratory for social 
change. Society has celebrated the military model of 
fair treatment of ethnic and racial minorities, for the advancement of women, and most recently for the fuller 
inclusion of homosexual and transsexual individuals. 
For the United States, the central problem of American civil-military relations is not about preventing a 
military takeover of the state. Rather, it is about finding 
the proper relationship between civilian and military 
leaders as they determine the preparation and use 
of force on the one hand, and the ends of policy on 
the other. Several scholars have posited alternative 
formulations for how this dialogue between civilians 
and military leaders should take place. In 1957, Samuel 
Huntington argued that the healthiest and most effective form of civilian control of the military is that which 
isolates the military from politics and require officers’ 
judgment only on military matters. Civilian leaders 
should set clear but general strategic objectives and 
then leave the military as much latitude as possible 
to achieve these goals. This is what he described as a 
system of “objective control.”9 This view is in contrast 
to that of Morris Janowitz, who contemporaneously 
argued for “subjective control” through greater citizen 
involvement with the military, especially the use of 
citizen-soldiers, who might provide an ability to control the military through multiple points of influence 
throughout society. 19 
More recently, the American political scientist and 
scholar Eliot Cohen updated these perspectives in his 
book Supreme Command: Soldiers, Statesmen, and Leadership in Wartime. Contrary to conventional wisdom, 
which tends to coincide more with Huntington’s 
“objective control,” Cohen concluded that the highest political authority should be very much engaged 
with the details of war and war planning. He argued 
that civilian leaders were most effective when they 
had an “unequal dialogue” with military leaders, 
in which “both sides expressed their views bluntly, 
indeed sometimes offensively, and not once but repeatedly—and unequal, in that the final authority of 
the civilian leaders was unambiguous and unquestioned.”20 This more engaging relationship between 
civilian “master” authority and military subordinated 
42
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
“servant” has been reinforced with the advent of 
nearly constant communications and meetings that 
take place between commanders and civilian leaders. 
This “unequal dialogue” with ongoing engagement 
between presidents and their military leaders has 
generally characterized supreme command under the 
administrations of George W. Bush, Barack Obama, 
and Donald Trump. 20,21
The “Unequal Dialogue” and the All-Volunteer 
Force 
Since the advent of the all-volunteer force in 1973, 
an increasingly fewer number of Americans have 
served in the military. While over 70% of Congress 
had served in the military when the draft ended in 
the 1970s, now less than 20% have served. 22 In the 
2016 presidential election, no competitive candidates 
of either party had any military experience. In spite 
of the decreasing military experience among elected 
officials, there is an increasing tendency to appoint 
military leaders to senior government positions that 
do not require, nor have been routinely filled by, 
senior military officers. For example, upon his inauguration, President Obama appointed three retired 
four-star generals to cabinet-rank positions: General 
Eric Shinseki as secretary of veterans affairs, General 
Jim Jones as national security advisor, and Admiral 
Dennis Blair as director of national intelligence. Appointment of retired senior officers has continued in 
the Trump administration, with General Jim Mattis as 
secretary of defense, General John Kelly as secretary 
of homeland security (and later White House chief of 
staff), and Lieutenant General Mike Flynn as national 
security advisor (later succeeded by an active duty 
officer, Lieutenant General H.R. McMaster).
The increasingly routine appointment of former 
senior military officers to traditionally “civilian” 
positions has been the subject of significant commentary. 23,24 In policy deliberations, these officers provide 
advice in their personal capacity, which may or may 
not agree with the best professional military advice 
from the uniformed military leaders charged with 
providing that advice. In addition to potential conflicts 
among leaders at the pinnacle of the profession, the 
presence of current or former military officers in civilian positions can raise suspicion about the aggregation 
of power in the military as an institution. If a smaller 
elite military force of “volunteers” becomes increasingly separate from the society it serves, yet increasingly powerful in determining government decisions, 
it may put at risk the critically important relationship 
between society and the military profession. 25 
The Military Profession and the Defense 
Bureaucracy
Budget stringency affects strategy and force modernization, including decisions on: “why we fight,” 
“how we fight,” and “what we fight with.” As Bernard 
Brodie elegantly explained, “strategy always wears a 
dollar sign.”26 However, the ultimate imperative and 
obligation facing national security policy makers is 
not how much of the federal budget is spent on defense or a particular service, but how federal spending should be used to best provide national security. 
While the military is a profession, and officers lead the 
profession, the Department of Defense is also a large 
bureaucracy, and the bureaucratic tendencies of the 
organization can sometimes dominate the characteristics of a profession. Military officers must both provide their best professional military advice and fulfill 
their role as leader of and advocate for their particular 
part of the defense bureaucracy. Understanding the 
EXHIBIT 3-1
“PROFESSION” VERSUS “BUREAUCRACY”
Profession
Bureaucracy
Expert knowledge
vs
Non-expert knowledge
Accepts life-long 
learning
vs
“You develop me”
New situations
vs
Routine situations
“Practice” by humans
vs
Work done by all
Unlimited personal 
liability
vs
Little personal liability
Invests in humans 
first
vs
Invests in SOPs; hardware
Measure = effectiveness
vs
Measure = efficiency
Trust relationship 
with client
vs
Public transactional 
relations
Granted some 
autonomy
vs
Closely supervised
Develops worldview
vs
No imposed viewpoint
Maintains ethos, selfpoliced
vs
Externally imposed 
rules
Intrinsic motivations
vs
Extrinsic motivations
A life-long “calling”
vs
A “job”
SOP: standard operating procedure
43
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
distinction between the characteristics of a profession 
and those of a bureaucracy are important, as reflected 
in Exhibit 3-1.
There are times when the military should act as a bureaucracy—when it performs routine things routinely, 
such as the annual budget process. Just as the medical 
profession should guard against arguing for doctors’ 
parochial interests (instead of the interests of patients 
and overall healthcare) in the national healthcare 
debate, military officers must guard against wrongly 
using their specialized expertise merely to advance a 
bureaucratic agenda. To do so could sacrifice the value 
of professional advice and relegate the military to being considered as just another interest group. 
As the United States grapples with the post-9/11 
conditions of new enemies, new battlespaces, and 
new kinds of wars, military officers should avoid at 
least three traditional pitfalls typically associated with 
times of geostrategic ambiguity, budget stringency, 
and force reductions: (1) becoming overcommitted to 
the latest technological trends at the expense of historical military challenges; (2) being tempted to rename, 
oversell, and fetishize new war concepts, especially 
in support of single-service parochial interests; and 
(3) overplaying the “hollow force” card, asserting 
that any reduction will irreparably degrade national 
security. Instead, military effectiveness needs to be 
seen, understood, appreciated, and approached from 
a comprehensive, multiservice perspective. Military 
professionals need to focus on maximizing national 
security while recognizing the fiscal impact that military spending has on overall national power. 27
Role of Professional Officers—Even After 
Retirement
In his farewell speech to Congress, General of the 
Army Douglas MacArthur said, “Old Soldiers never 
die, they just fade away.”28 If MacArthur were correct, 
there would be far less confusion about the proper role 
of military officers in political debates and presidential 
campaigns. As an example of the former, there were 
significant conflicts among military professionals 
concerning the strategy for the war in Iraq. An April 
13, 2006, front-page Washington Post article described 
a small but significant number of retired US military 
general officers who publicly objected to current US 
strategy toward Iraq and called for the resignation of 
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld. 29 Dubbed the 
“generals’ revolt,” these objections challenged US intelligence, planning for postwar Iraq, counterinsurgency 
strategy, and the effectiveness of Secretary Rumsfeld. 
The generals’ protests did not cause Secretary Rumsfeld to resign, but did exacerbate civil-military tensions 
and raised questions about the relationship between 
the American military and the American state, and the 
proper role and limits of military officers in affairs of 
politics and war. 
In political campaigns, especially since 1992, it has 
become common for each major candidate to “round 
up the military vote” by securing endorsements 
of senior officers. Prior to 1992, most presidential 
candidates had military experience, so military endorsements were not as important. Admiral William 
Crowe’s endorsement of candidate Bill Clinton is 
generally regarded as the beginning of the era of military endorsements of presidential candidates. 30 While 
this tactic may be useful for winning a campaign, it 
has negative implications for officership. Although 
officers may be retired, they have not broken their 
lifelong commitment to their profession. This is especially the case with flag officers, whose rank is broadly 
recognized and respected. In the 2016 presidential 
campaign, teams of retired flag officers were led by 
retired Marine General John Allen for Hillary Clinton 
and by retired Army Lieutenant General Michael Flynn 
for Donald Trump. The former chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, General (retired) Martin Dempsey, rebuked these public political performances in an open 
letter to the Washington Post:
The military is not a political prize. Politicians should 
take the advice of senior military leaders but keep 
them off the stage. The American people should not 
wonder where their military leaders draw the line 
between military advice and political preference. 
And our nation’s soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines should not wonder about the political leanings 
and motivations of their leaders. 31
While military officers have the right to speak, just 
like any other citizen, it may not be right for them to 
do so, especially in a way that sullies the profession 
and could cheapen the value of military advice in the 
future. 
The difference between a military in the service 
of the United States and a praetorian guard in the 
service of an empire and emperor teeters on a thin 
line of legal, ethical, and professional principles that 
define the proper limits of the military’s jurisdictions 
in affairs of war, peace, and politics. The American 
public’s skepticism of a standing military is a historic 
and healthy one; it is rooted in experiences under 
military occupation in the years prior to 1776. A mix of 
legal statutes and professional conventions within US 
military services restrict the military from engaging in 
issues deemed “political.”32 Whether what American 
44
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
society witnesses in terms of the “unequal dialogue” 
between civilian authorities and their subordinated 
military professionals reflects more of the Huntington 
“objective control,” or more of a relative and perhaps 
cloudy “subjective control” civil-military relationship 
as described by Janowitz, is a function of the circumstances at hand, the civilian leaders, and the military 
leaders of the profession. 
TYPES OF SPECIALIZED EXPERTISE
This chapter has discussed officership in the context of the “profession of arms,” which might cause 
an incorrect conclusion that there is only one military 
profession. Just as the medical profession has subspecialties (eg, cardiology, family medicine, orthopedics, aviation medicine, dermatology), each of the 
military’s specialized professions operates somewhat 
independently, with their own standards, norms, and 
cultures. If America’s profession of arms is like a tapestry or quilt, the semi-independent service arms are 
the separate panels and patches that, knitted together, 
form and sustain the overall profession. While any 
generalization is made with great trepidation because 
there are certainly many exceptions, the following is 
a broad attempt to depict the general culture of each 
military service. 33
The Army: Obedient Servant Emphasizing People
RAND Corporation senior analyst and service culture scholar Carl Builder described the US Army as 
“first and foremost, the Nation’s obedient and loyal 
military servant.”34 The Army focuses on the readiness and preparation of its personnel and emphasizes 
that the Army’s “boots on the ground” in an area is 
the ultimate expression of American national will and 
power. At the US Military Academy at West Point, cadets spend 4 years walking past statues of Washington, 
MacArthur, Eisenhower, Patton, and other leaders, 
reinforcing the criticality of the human dimension 
of the profession. The Army hallways of the Pentagon are adorned with division and regimental flags, 
pictures of battles that focus on images of soldiers, 
and tributes to individuals from the Army’s history. 
The Army emphasizes cooperation and coordination 
both within and between services because success in 
battle requires the effective coordination of all arms 
and services. While officers from some maneuver 
branches—particularly the infantry and armor—still 
tend to dominate leadership positions, no battle can 
be won without transportation support; fire from 
artillery; close air support from aviation; data from 
intelligence sources; communications from signal 
units; mobility from engineers; security from military 
police; sustainment from logisticians; field sanitation, 
preventive medicine, and casualty care from medical 
personnel; and myriad other functions based on the 
requirements of individual dynamic engagements. The 
need for the complex coordination and independent 
synchronization of all units leads to a great emphasis 
on fairness, inclusiveness, and, to the extent possible, 
decentralization among all branches and units in the 
Army.
As difficult as it is to characterize service culture, it is 
even more difficult to generalize about the intellectual 
progenitors of a profession’s doctrine or thinking, or 
to summarize a comprehensive body of thought about 
military power in a few sentences. However, making 
such generalizations is important because they provide 
a window through which the specialized expertise of a 
profession can be understood. For the US Army, if officers were asked to identify an intellectual godfather, 
many would name Carl von Clausewitz, who wrote 
On War35 in the 19th century. Clausewitz’s dictum 
that “war is an extension of politics by other means,” 
resonates well with the Army as the obedient and loyal 
military servant of political masters. His emphasis on 
the “fog and friction in war” reinforces the need for 
military judgment, what Clausewitz calls “military genius.” Army leaders are comfortable with his emphasis 
on the human dimension of warfare and the need for 
consistent yet constrained linkages between political 
leadership and military decision-making. They strive 
to develop the specialized expertise in land warfare 
that supports effectiveness in battle.
The Air Force: Victory Through Technology
As the youngest service, spun off from the Army 
in 1947, the US Air Force sees itself as the service that 
best embodies the modern American way of war—use 
of decisive technological superiority to overwhelm 
and defeat any potential foe while avoiding risk of 
American casualties. From General Billy Mitchell’s 
use of airpower to sink battleships in 1921, to the 
World War II air raids over Europe and the nuclear 
bombs dropped in Japan, to the shock and awe at 
the opening of the Iraq War, the Air Force continues 
to emphasize the use of high technology to deliver 
decisive military victory. At the Air Force Academy, 
cadets hold formation in a quadrangle surrounded 
by airplanes on pedestals and gaze at the cold-metal 
roof of the academy chapel that sweeps up toward the 
heavens. The Air Force halls in the Pentagon, like most 
45
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
Air Force headquarters and the Air Force monument 
near the Pentagon, emphasize sleek, functional, modern designs, much as might be seen in the corporate 
offices of a high-technology firm. In contrast to the 
Army’s pictures where the soldier is the centerpiece, 
the pictures and murals in the Air Force section feature 
aircraft from different eras, with fewer depictions of 
the airman. Also in contrast to the Army’s general 
equanimity with regard to all branches, the Air Force 
prioritizes the pilot as the focus of its human capital 
strategy because it is the pilot who commands the 
sophisticated and expensive technology and renders 
the decisive power in combat. 
Air Force proponents will often point to several 
strategists who have recognized the decisive nature of 
air power in warfare, including Giulio Douhet, Billy 
Mitchell, Hap Arnold, and Curtis LeMay. Recently, 
John Warden, who helped design and implement 
the use of air power in Desert Storm, has been an 
influential strategist. Expanded information technology has enhanced centralization and prioritization of 
precision technology so that the Air Force can provide 
more effective, efficient, and decisive effects on targets 
anywhere in the world. This centralized control is embodied in two mainstays of Air Force operations—the 
single integrated operational plan (SIOP) for nuclear 
weapons and the air tasking order (ATO) for conventional engagements. Both plans are developed 
by dynamically assimilating all possible intelligence 
and environmental information and then precisely allocating virtually every weapon of each plane or each 
warhead of each missile against an optimal target. 
With its penchant for precision application of technology, the Air Force has also pushed for leadership 
in the development of cyber warfare capabilities as 
well. With increasingly sophisticated intelligence and 
network connectivity, air power can become an even 
more decisive element of modern warfare.
The Navy: Independent Exercise of National 
Sovereignty
The US Navy is “the supranational institution 
that has inherited the British Navy’s throne to naval 
supremacy . . . sea power [is] the most important and 
flexible kind of military power for America as a maritime Nation.”34(p32) The Navy is quick to point out that 
“70 percent of the earth is covered by water, 80 percent 
of the world’s population lives in close proximity to 
the coast, and 90 percent of the world’s international 
commerce is transported via the sea.”36 The Navy can 
exert American sovereignty throughout the globe and 
literally show the flag without the inconvenience of 
placing US soldiers in harm’s way on another nation’s 
soil. Moreover, the Navy is its own complete joint force 
with air power through naval aviation, land power 
through the Marines, and Navy SEAL teams providing 
special operations. 
At the Naval Academy, the midshipmen’s lives 
are dominated by Bancroft Hall—a single imposing 
dormitory that houses all midshipmen. Like a large 
ship, it subordinates the accomplishments of any single 
individual to the overall success of the institution as 
a whole. In the Pentagon, the Navy hallways exude 
tradition and imposing dignity with dark wooden 
walls, brass door hardware, and impressive model 
ships that reflect the extension of naval influence across 
the globe. In spite of modern communications that can 
impede the previously cherished independence of sea 
operations, great autonomy is still provided to a ship’s 
captain or a fleet admiral. Being accustomed to giving 
orders that cause a ship full of sailors and marines 
to change course, Navy leaders are more deferential 
toward senior-ranking officers, who, in turn, are more 
likely to act autonomously and be somewhat less concerned with inclusiveness of all components in their 
decision-making.
Most Navy leaders would point to Alfred Thayer 
Mahan as the grand theoretician who established the 
Navy’s view toward global warfare. Mahan’s belief that 
a state’s power and sovereignty is inextricably linked 
to its sea power reinforces the Navy’s self-image and 
importance. 37 This view is consistent with the Constitution, which, as noted above, requires Congress 
“to provide and maintain a navy” but only to “raise 
and support armies,” reflecting the nation’s intended 
permanence of the naval service for the United States 
as a maritime power. 11 The US Navy, like the other 
services, has leveraged information technology to 
exploit network-centric warfare and increased the effectiveness of its ships while reducing the overall size 
of the Navy.
The Marine Corps: The Nation’s Force of Choice
The US Marine Corps’ organizational culture is 
summed up in their recruiting motto: “The few. The 
proud. The Marines.” Completely dependent on the 
Navy for budgetary, administrative, and logistics 
support and competing with the Army for many land 
power missions, the Marine Corps best represents 
the challenge that all services face in the continuous 
reexamination of service roles and missions, despite 
their successes in past conflicts. The Air Force had to 
demonstrate its contribution to the ground war following its introduction in the early 20th century as an 
arm of the Army Signal Corps. The Doolittle raid on 
Tokyo served this purpose, as did strategic bombing 
46
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
in Europe. The Navy’s addition of aircraft and submarines extended its utility beyond the iron ships of the 
early 20th century. The Army’s experimentation with 
missile- and artillery-delivered tactical nuclear weapons at the outset of the Cold War and its more recent 
transition into dispersed forces across an expansive 
and often austere battlespace represent similar efforts 
at reengineering. 
Although the dismantling of the US Marine Corps 
is unlikely, Marine Corps leaders at all levels act as 
if it could happen any day if they fail to forcefully 
and publicly demonstrate its continuous relevance 
to US national security. This is why Marine Corps 
documents advertise the service as “the nation’s 911 
force,” or “the expeditionary force of choice,” and its 
leaders endeavor to be recognized as the lead force 
in nearly any global engagement. The Marine Corps 
makes every individual marine believe that the fate 
of the Corps (and the nation) is in their hands, and 
they must make the Corps proud. Every marine is 
first a rifleman and will endure any burden and suffer 
any sacrifice “to do what must be done ‘in any clime 
and place’ and under any conditions . . . to respond 
quickly and win.”38 
The Marine Corps does not have its own academy, 
but derives many of its traditions from the Navy. In 
the Pentagon, the marines maintain a relatively small 
presence, with much of their headquarters in nearby 
Henderson Hall. However, any time marines are near 
any headquarters, just like the Marine guards at every 
US embassy, they are highly visible and exemplify spitand-polish service standards that are second to none.
Marine Corps officers read widely and benefit from 
both Army and Navy strategic thought to develop their 
own professional identity and specialized expertise. 
If pressed to name an individual who drives their 
thought, marines might identify heroic individuals 
such as Lieutenant General Lewis “Chesty” Puller, 
whose five Navy Crosses for heroism epitomize the 
marine’s can-do attitude. 39 It is more likely, however, 
that they would identify the current or a recent commandant of the Marine Corps as the source of their 
intellectual thought. In contrast to the other services, 
which frequently have from eight to eleven four-star 
generals or admirals each, the Marine Corps is much 
smaller and typically has only three or four four-star 
generals. Consequently, the commandant is truly 
supreme within the Corps, facing little pushback to 
directives because, other than the assistant commandant, there is no other four-star general within the 
service proper. (Other Marine four-star generals may 
command combatant commands or serve as chairman 
or vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs.) When General 
Dunford issued his initial planning guidance as commandant of the Marine Corps, for example, he cited 
no outside authorities other than five quotes from 
four previous commandants. 38 The ability to carefully 
construct and then focus the Marine Corps on a single, 
compelling, and consistent message is important to 
the Corps’ organizational culture and professional 
identity.
Special Operations: The “Quiet Professionals”
Although technically not a service, the United States 
has created essentially a fifth branch of the military—
those involved in US Special Operations, who increasingly operate with each other and separately from their 
original services. All uniformed personnel in special 
operations are originally recruited and trained by their 
specific service (Army, Air Force, Navy, or Marine 
Corps) and then must volunteer and be selected by 
special operations organizations. Special operations 
personnel address unique, specialized, and difficult 
military problems that require exceptionally trained, 
exquisitely equipped, and tremendously supported 
warfighters. While other services can overwhelm enemies with massive combat power, special operations 
provides discreet, sometimes covert, precision military 
capabilities that have become increasingly relevant in 
modern warfare. Special operations missions include 
direct action, counterterrorism, special reconnaissance, 
civil affairs, psychological operations, unconventional 
warfare, supporting indigenous forces on their internal 
defense, and countering proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction.
Although the lineage of special operations dates to 
work with the Office of Strategic Services in World War 
II, President Kennedy described the environment that 
gave rise to special operations forces in his 1962 West 
Point graduation speech:
This is another type of war, new in its intensity, ancient in its origin—war by guerrillas, subversives, 
insurgents, assassins, war by ambush instead of by 
combat; by infiltration, instead of aggression, seeking victory by eroding and exhausting the enemy instead of engaging him . . . [It requires] a whole new 
kind of strategy, a wholly different kind of force, and 
therefore a new and wholly different kind of military 
training. 40
With President Kennedy’s emphasis and the needs 
of Vietnam, services expanded their own special organizations forces: Army Rangers, Army Special Forces, 
Navy SEAL teams, Navy Special Boat squadrons, and 
Air Force Special Operations squadrons. These units 
operated under service control and cooperated with 
each other, but were certainly not integrated. The 
47
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
failed mission to rescue American hostages in Iran in 
1980 and the lack of coordination among services in 
Grenada in 1983 reflected significant shortcomings. 
In response, the 1986 Goldwater-Nichols Act created 
the US Special Operations Command (SOCOM) with 
special status and authorities. SOCOM operates as 
both a military service that provides forces, in that it 
organizes, trains, and equips special operations forces, 
as well as a combatant command that employs forces 
throughout the world. This unique status, with its own 
funding authorities and ability to report directly to the 
Office of the Secretary of Defense, has distinguished 
special operations personnel from their parent service 
and contributed to their development as a separate and 
distinct profession.
Members of special operations forces undergo rigorous selection and training, which sets them apart 
from their parent service and creates a greater bond 
among special operators, who often identify first as 
being part of special operations and second as having 
originally joined their specific service. In this regard, 
if they sought a single personification of special operations, many might identify John Wayne in his classic 
depiction of a Special Forces officer in the Vietnam-era 
movie, The Green Berets. This movie emphasized the 
exceptional small unit teamwork, precision action, 
cultural understanding, innovation, and problemsolving ability of elite special operations forces. In the 
current environment, SOCOM has integrated those 
elite small units with exceptional intelligence capabilities to empower and enhance their effectiveness. This 
integrated intelligence-operations linkage, known as 
the “find, fix, finish, exploit, and analyze” or the F3EA 
concept, has allowed SOCOM to expand and execute 
more systematic actions against high value targets in 
Iraq and Afghanistan. The most noteworthy example 
was the May 2011 raid that killed Osama bin Laden. 
These expanded, high-profile operations have raised 
the visibility of special operations, even leading some 
members to write books or grant interviews about 
previously highly secret operations. Navy Seal Mark 
Bissonette wrote a book about the “the Mission that 
Killed Osama Bin Laden,” and was eventually forced 
to pay $6. 6 million to the US government and forfeit 
any profits, royalties, and movie opportunities for 
violating nondisclosure agreements. 41 While proud 
of the work that all special operations teams do, most 
special operations professionals would prefer that 
their stories remain largely untold, reinforcing their 
ethos as the “quiet professionals.”
CONCLUSION
It is appropriate to conclude by reiterating the 
importance of the professional armed forces officer’s 
commissioning oath. Returning to S.L.A. Marshall’s 
classic work, The Armed Forces Officer, both Marshalls—
S. L. A. Marshall and George C. Marshall, secretary of 
defense at that the time—emphasized the linkage of 
the officer corps with service to nation:
Thereafter, [the officer] is given a paper which says 
that because the President as representative of the 
people of this country reposes “special trust and confidence” in his [or her] “patriotism, valor, fidelity, and 
abilities,” he [or she] is forthwith commissioned. 2(p4) 
S.L.A. Marshall went on to highlight one quality in 
particular: fidelity. Fidelity is commonly considered 
“faithfulness to something to which one is bound by 
pledge or duty.”42 In spite of all the formal rules and 
legal statutes obligating the commissioned officer 
to the Constitution, and through it, to the American 
people, officers’ fidelity has proven to be the most 
enduring tie that binds officership and the profession of arms to the nation. This bond has helped 
the nation weather many storms, both foreign and 
domestic. Similar to the medical profession’s code of 
medical ethics, which traces its origins to the historic 
Hippocratic oath, the fidelity of the military professional has always found its strongest roots in the rich 
soils of American history. Examples set by leaders 
from General George Washington to General Martin 
Dempsey reinforce the principle of subordination of 
the military practitioner to the “patient needs,” in this 
case, to civilian authority, and through that authority, 
to the defense of the nation. It is this ultimate duty and 
obligation that unites the medical profession and the 
profession of arms.
REFERENCES
 
1. US Army. Oaths of enlistment and oaths of office. US Army Center of Military History website. http://www.history.
army.mil/html/faq/oaths.html. Accessed January 22, 2018.
 
2. Marshall SLA. The Armed Forces Officer. Washington, DC: Department of Defense; 1950. DA Pamphlet 600-2. 
 
3. US Department of Defense. The Armed Forces Officer. Washington DC: National Defense University Press; 2007.
48
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
4. Snider DM, Watkins GL, eds. The Future of the Army Profession. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2002. 
 
5. Snider DM, Matthews LJ, eds. The Future of the Army Profession. 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2005.
 
6. Toner JH. True Faith and Allegiance: The Burden of Military Ethics. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 1995: 
22–23.
 
7. MacFarland S. Fight, kill, die, buddy: words professional soldiers live by. Milit Rev Special Edition. 2011;91(suppl):51–55.
 
8. Yingling P, Nagl J. The Army officer as warfighter. Milit Rev. 2003;83:9–14.
 
9. Huntington SP. The Soldier and the State. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press; 1957: 7-8.
 10. Bassett L. Senators shoot down Gillibrand’s military sexual assault reform bill. Huffington Post. December 11, 2014. 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/12/11/gillibrands-military-sexual-assault_n_6309108.html. Accessed February 
9, 2018.
 11. US Constitution, article 1, section 8.
 12. Washington G. Newburgh address, March 15, 1783. Presidential Rhetoric.com. http://www.presidentialrhetoric.com/
historicspeeches/washington/newburgh.html. Accessed January 22, 2018.
 13. 10 USC § 113, 3013, 5013, 8013. 
 14. Spanier J. The Truman-MacArthur Controversy and the Korean War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 1959: 
vii.
 15. Ulrich MP. The General Stanley McChrystal affair: a case study in civil-military relations. Parameters. 2011;41:86–100.
 16. Snider DM. Forging the Warrior’s Character: Moral Precepts From the Cadet Prayer. Sisters, OR: Jerico LLC; 2007.
 17. Cohen EA. Foreword. In: Snider DM, Carlton-Carew MA, eds. U.S. Civil-Military Relations: In Crisis or Transition? 
Washington, DC: The Center for Strategic and International Studies; 1995: vii. 
 18. Neustadt RE. Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents: The Politics of Leadership from Roosevelt to Reagan. New York, 
NY: The Free Press; 1990. 
 19. Janowitz M. The Professional Soldier: A Social and Political Portrait. New York, NY: The Free Press; 1960.
 20. Cohen EA. Supreme Command: Soldiers, Statesmen, and Leadership in Wartime. New York, NY: The Free Press; 2002: 209. 
 21. Moten M. Presidents and Their Generals: An American History of Command in War. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press; 2014.
 22. Manning JE. Membership of the 115th Congress: A Profile. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service; 2017. CRS 
Report for Congress R44762. https://www.hsdl.org/?abstract&did=799693. Accessed January 22, 2018.
 23. Rucker P, DeBonis M. Trump hires a third general, raising concerns about heavy military influence. Washington Post. 
December 7, 2016.
 24. Graham DA. All the president-elect’s generals. Atlantic. December 8, 2016. 
 25. Kaplan F. The secretary’s rebuke: James Mattis tells the troops that their president is failing them. Slate. http://www.
slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/war_stories/2017/08/why_james_mattis_viral_rebuke_of_trump_was_so_disturbing.html. Accessed January 22, 2018.
 26. Brodie B. Strategy in the Missile Age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1959: 358–389.
49
Officership and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century
 27. Wilson I III, Smitson S. Solving America’s Gray Zone Puzzle. Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute Press; 2017: 65. 
 28. US Congress. House. General Douglas MacArthur’s Speech to Joint Session of Congress. 82nd Congress, 1st Session, 
Congressional Record, April 19, 1951, 4123-4125.
 29. Ricks TE. Rumsfeld rebuked by retired general. Washington Post. April 13, 2006, A1.
 30. Evans D. Crowe endorsement of Clinton raises more than eyebrows. Chicago Tribune. September 25, 1992. 
 31. Dempsey ME. Military leaders do not belong at political conventions. Letter to the Editors, Washington Post. July 31, 
2016. 
 32. Wilson I III. Being “the good soldier.” Democracy Arsenal. April 15, 2006, http://www.democracyarsenal.org/2006/04/
being_the_good_.html Accessed January 22, 2018.
 33. Meese MJ, Wilson I III. The military: forging a joint warrior culture. In: George RZ, Rishikof H, eds. The National Security Enterprise. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press; 2011: Chap 6.
 34. Builder CH. The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins; 1989: 
33.
 35. von Clausewitz C. On War. Howard ME, Paret P, trans-eds. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1976.
 36. Winter DC. Posture Statement of the U.S. Navy. Washington, DC: Department of the Navy, 2008: 3.
 37. Crowl PA. Alfred Thayer Mahan: The Naval Historian. In: Paret P, ed. Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to 
the Nuclear Age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1986: 444–477.
 38. Dunford JF Jr. 36th Commandant’s Planning Guidance. Washington, DC: U.S. Marine Corps, 2015. pp 4.
 39. Hoffman JT. Chesty: The Story of Lieutenant General Lewis B. Puller, USMC. New York, NY: Random House; 2002.
 40. Kennedy JF. Remarks at West Point to the Graduating Class of the U.S. Military Academy. June 6, 1962, http://www.
presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=8695 Accessed 22 Jan 2018.
 41. Owen M, Maurer K. No Easy Day: The Firsthand Account of the Mission that Killed Osama Bin Laden. New York, NY: Dutton Penguin; 2012. 
 42. Fidelity. Merriam-Webster online dictionary. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/fidelity. Accessed January 
22, 2018.
50
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
