91
The Law of Armed Conflict and Military Medicine
Chapter 6
THE LAW OF ARMED CONFLICT AND 
MILITARY MEDICINE
MICHAEL H. HOFFMAN, JD*
INTRODUCTION
THE EVOLVING CONTEXT OF INTERNATIONAL LAW AND MILITARY 
MEDICINE
RESPONSIBILITIES AND PROTECTION OF MILITARY MEDICAL PERSONNEL 
Application of the Law of Armed Conflict by Medical Officers
War Crimes 
Intent of the Law of Armed Conflict in Relation to Military Medicine 
Status of Military Medical Units and Personnel
Responsibilities and Protection of Military Medical Personnel and Units During 
Armed Conflict
Medical Operations Conducted in Cooperation With Coalition Partners
PROTECTION OF CIVILIAN MEDICAL STAFF AND HOSPITALS IN ARMED 
CONFLICT
APPLICATION OF INTERNATIONAL LAW IN PEACETIME MEDICAL 
DEPLOYMENTS
CONCLUSION
*Associate Professor, US Army Command and General Staff College; Assistant Professor, Uniformed Services University of the Health Science; Barden 
Education Center, Ft Belvoir, Virginia
92
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
INTRODUCTION
The positive humanitarian impact of compliance 
with the medical law of armed conflict is great. The 
negative human, legal, political, and military impact of 
noncompliance can be even greater. Military medical 
officers (MMOs) need to understand not only the key 
humanitarian obligations of military medical personnel and units in armed conflict, but also their rationale, 
in order to ensure the law is effectively applied in 
varied, uncertain, and sometimes rapidly changing 
operational settings. In addition to the suffering that 
follows if the law is not applied, there can be serious 
legal consequences for medical personnel who fail to 
apply it—and long-lasting damage to the honor and 
credibility of the United States and the nation’s armed 
forces. 
To help impart the level of insight required to mesh 
medical operations with international law, this chapter 
provides a conceptual overview of key responsibilities and 
legal protection requirements for military medical personnel during armed conflict. It is not a detailed guide for 
implementation of the Geneva Conventions, nor a manual 
attempting a comprehensive survey of the wide and varied 
range of medical issues that may arise under the Geneva 
Conventions. Readers who want to explore these issues 
in depth can find guidance on additional resources later 
in this chapter. It is essential for MMOs to work closely 
with a staff judge advocate legal advisor in all phases of the 
planning and execution of the military medical mission. 
The legal requirements in all military operations must be 
considered with great care and implemented accordingly. 
THE EVOLVING CONTEXT OF INTERNATIONAL LAW AND MILITARY MEDICINE
International law is less familiar to most people 
than the rules found in national, state, and local law. 
However, international law plays a behind-the-scenes 
role shaping daily interactions that many people take 
for granted. It provides the framework for routine 
international travel, communications, trade, and 
cultural exchange. It is more challenging to apply 
international law during armed conflict, but there is 
a well-developed system of treaties and customary 
practice that applies to regulate war as well.
Customary international law is the earliest form 
of the law of armed conflict. It has been in use for 
centuries. The customary law of armed conflict 
(most widely known as the customary law of war) 
is made up of any “consistent practice of states” that 
comes to be accepted as a binding legal norm even if 
it has not been formalized in a written agreement. 1 
The United States has implemented the law of war 
beginning with the application of customary law 
during the American Revolution. To seal the decisive American victory at Yorktown in 1781, General 
Washington negotiated an elaborate customary 
surrender process with General Cornwallis, and US 
military medical services have continuously honored the national commitment to the law of armed 
conflict by providing medical treatment for enemy 
prisoners of war into the modern age. 2–4
The modern, treaty-based law of armed conflict 
first significantly emerged with the adoption of the 
first Geneva Convention for the Wounded and Sick 
in 1864. The principles embodied in that treaty still 
guide its signatories in the 21st century. Though 
President Lincoln and Secretary of State Seward 
were reluctant to commit to these Geneva negotiations during the American Civil War, they did send 
a senior diplomat and a representative from the US 
Sanitary Commission, a major nongovernmental 
organization caring for the wounded and sick in 
the ongoing US conflict, to serve as observers at 
the conference. 5 The United States ratified the first 
Geneva Convention in 1882, and has ratified each 
of the Geneva Conventions that followed in later 
generations (see Chapter 1, History of the Military 
Medical Officer, Exhibit 1-2, for more background 
on the chronological development of the Geneva 
Conventions). 
The modern law of armed conflict is primarily 
treaty based. The four Geneva Conventions of 1949 
establish the responsibilities, status, and protection 
afforded to medical personnel; the wounded, sick, and 
shipwrecked members of armed forces; prisoners of 
war; and civilians under the law of armed conflict. Accordingly, they are the main focus of this chapter and 
are also explored in further detail in the Department 
of Defense (DoD) Law of War Manual. 6
The terms “law of war,” “law of armed conflict” 
(sometimes abbreviated as LOAC), and “international 
humanitarian law” (frequently abbreviated as IHL) 
tend to be used interchangeably. 7 Though there is 
some disagreement on whether each term applies to 
precisely the same set of rules, for this chapter they can 
be considered identical. The focus for MMOs will be 
on the Geneva rules. (Sometimes a distinction is drawn 
between “Geneva law” for humanitarian protection, 
and “Hague law” for regulation of the means and 
methods of war, meaning rules governing targeting 
and the weaponry employed. MMOs fulfill Geneva 
law in their duties.)
93
The Law of Armed Conflict and Military Medicine
The law of armed conflict has evolved from a 
specialized field known only to a handful of legal 
practitioners and scholars to one receiving constant, 
widespread media coverage and intense scrutiny by 
human rights organizations. Failure to implement 
the law of armed conflict raises the possibility of 
prosecution under the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (see also Chapter 5, Military Law and Ethics) and opens the door to accusations that MMOs 
have breached medical ethics. Such failure—even 
mistaken or deliberately false accusations of violations of the law of war—might spur political backlash and international condemnation, undermining 
prospects for success in a military campaign. 8
The DoD Law of War Manual includes the following 
cautionary observations: “For example, violations of 
the law of war in counter-insurgency operations may 
diminish the support of the local population. Violations 
of the law of war may also diminish the support of the 
populace in democratic States, including the United 
States and other States that would otherwise support 
or participate in coalition operations. Violations of the 
law of war committed by one side may encourage third 
parties to support the opposing side.”9 By impartially 
and firmly carrying out humanitarian medical obligations for all protected persons under Geneva law, MMOs 
also protect the credibility of the armed forces and the 
nation as a whole.
RESPONSIBILITIES AND PROTECTION OF MILITARY MEDICAL PERSONNEL 
Application of the Law of Armed Conflict by 
Medical Officers
The Geneva Conventions are a legal foundation 
for quiet, successful implementation of the law of 
armed conflict on an ongoing basis. For example, 
many prisoners of war around the world regularly 
receive protective visits to ensure their safety and 
well-being. 10 MMOs are responsible for successful 
implementation of the medical dimensions of 
the law of armed conflict. They are expected to 
fulfill this role both through direct leadership and 
indirectly through leadership by moral example. 
MMOs exercise such leadership in concert with other 
military and civilian leaders at all levels of the US 
government.
The United States’ commitment to application 
of the law of armed conflict takes many forms. 
US commanders are responsible for the law’s 
implementation. Alleged violations are investigated 
for possible prosecution or (depending on the 
level of severity of the alleged offense) for other 
disciplinary or corrective action. Judge advocates 
at all levels of command furnish legal advice on 
interpretation and implementation of the law of 
armed conflict. 11 Although every actual or potential 
enemy will not apply them in whole or even in part, 
US MMOs need to understand the rules and apply 
them regardless. It bears repeating that MMOs lead 
by example, and not only when serving in command 
assignments. They must not express cynicism about 
the law of armed conflict in any circumstances, 
regardless of how they may feel about enemies 
who commit war crimes. Any hint of such cynical 
or negative views about the law of armed conflict 
may help provoke negative action and conduct by 
other medical personnel. 
War Crimes
While US MMOs need to focus on the mission—including implementation of the medical requirements 
of the law of armed conflict—situational awareness requires some understanding of the scope and characteristics of war crimes as envisioned in international law. 
MMOs have a solemn responsibility to help ensure that 
the medical dimensions of the law of armed conflict 
are fully implemented in their command. This requires 
strong direct leadership and leadership by example. 
It requires careful monitoring to help ensure that US 
military and civilian personnel fulfill their obligations 
under the Geneva Conventions in all situations, including those where feelings may run high in the face of 
reports and evidence of war crimes.
Medical personnel may encounter evidence of war 
crimes in the field, or treat patients who are traumatized survivors of war crimes. Higher headquarters 
must be notified immediately if such issues or evidence 
should arise. Despite careful attention to the protection of medical units and personnel under the Geneva 
Conventions, urgent force protection requirements 
demand awareness that some enemies will deliberately 
target medical facilities, personnel, transport, patients, 
and supplies. 
A sense of the potential scale and gravity of such 
challenges is presented by systematic, continuing 
violations of the law of armed conflict in Syria during 
the civil war. The Syrian government has deliberately 
targeted medical personnel in the ongoing conflict in 
that country. As reported in The Lancet, “The weaponisation of health care—a strategy of using people’s need 
for health care as a weapon against them by violently 
depriving them of it—has translated into hundreds of 
health workers killed, hundreds more incarcerated or 
tortured, and hundreds of health facilities deliberately 
94
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
and systematically attacked.”12 These crimes are not 
limited to the battlefield. The Syrian government has 
also used a network of hospitals, and hospital staff, 
to systematically torture, mutilate, and murder captives on a mass scale. 13 As one consequence, medical 
activities have been driven underground to avoid 
deliberate attack by the Syrian authorities. Efforts to 
provide medical care are driven by logistically challenging and costly requirements to set up very limited 
underground facilities. 14
Some enemies may not only be willing to engage in 
deliberate attacks on protected medical sites, personnel, and patients, and to appropriate medical facilities to commit horrific crimes, they may even remain 
contemptuous of international law when efforts are 
made to provide them with the medical services they 
should receive after being captured. Dating back to 
at least the Korean War, US medical personnel have 
sometimes encountered situations where captured 
enemy wounded, rather than cooperating in their 
clinical care, have continued hostile conduct even in 
a medical setting. 15
Application of the law in the face of war crimes 
committed by the enemy comports well with the ethos 
expected of physicians. In peacetime, fully professional application of the healing arts is expected, even 
when this benefits the most reprehensible members 
of society. The same principle applies by analogy 
in wartime. Addressing such challenges, maintaining situational awareness, and fostering a command 
climate in which medical personnel will unfailingly 
apply the Geneva Conventions, even in the face of 
understandable outrage and extreme provocation, 
requires some understanding of the international law 
of war crimes. A brief survey of the law is provided 
here, followed by a more extensive review of the rules 
that are positively applied by US medical personnel in 
all situations involving armed conflict. 
There is no universal definition of war crimes, but 
one that focuses on medical issues comes from Geneva 
Convention I of 1949. Under this Convention, particularly serious war crimes, known as grave breaches, are 
described as follows:
Grave breaches . . . shall be those involving any of 
the following acts, if committed against persons or 
property protected by the Convention: wilful killing, 
torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments, wilfully causing great suffering or serious 
injury to body or health, and extensive destruction and 
appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully or wantonly. 16
A pattern of war crimes may constitute a distinctive 
category of offenses known as crimes against humanity. There is no universally accepted definition for 
such crimes, but MMOs must be alert in the field for 
medical evidence that points towards such systematic 
crimes. Though the United States has not ratified the 
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the 
definition found in that treaty is a useful point of reference for these crimes:
For the purpose of this Statute, “crime against humanity” means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack 
directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack: 
 (a) Murder; 
 (b) Extermination; 
 (c) Enslavement; 
 (d) Deportation or forcible transfer of population; 
 (e) Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of 
physical liberty in violation of fundamental 
rules of international law; 
 
(f) Torture; 
 (g) Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, 
forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or 
any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity; 
 (h) Persecution against any identifiable group 
or collectivity on political, racial, national, 
ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined 
in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are 
universally recognized as impermissible 
under international law, in connection with 
any act referred to in this paragraph or any 
crime within the jurisdiction of the Court; 
 
(i) Enforced disappearance of persons; 
 
(j) The crime of apartheid; 
 (k) Other inhumane acts of a similar character 
intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical 
health. 17
Genocide, the war crime potentially most far reaching, can also take place in peacetime. Genocide is a 
crime that was identified, defined, and expressly prohibited in a treaty adopted in 1948. The UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime 
of Genocide defines this crime as follows: 
In the present Convention, genocide means any of the 
following acts committed with the intent to destroy, in 
whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious 
group, as such:
 (a) Killing members of the group;
 (b) Causing serious bodily or mental harm 
 
 to members of the group;
 (c) Deliberately inflicting on the group condi95
The Law of Armed Conflict and Military Medicine
tions of life calculated to bring about its 
physical destruction in whole or in part; 
 (d) Imposing measures intended to prevent 
births within the group; 
 (e) Forcibly transferring children of the group 
to another group. 18
Some physicians were complicit in crimes on the 
scale of genocide and crimes against humanity during World War II. Some of the most shocking crimes 
ever documented in a courtroom were those involving vicious, lethal experimentation on human beings 
by doctors who supported the Nazi regime. The first 
in the series of trials of senior level Nazi officials that 
took place in Nuremburg, following World War II, is 
known as the “Doctors’ Trial.” It resulted in a number 
of convictions, and the presiding judges in this trial 
developed the Nuremberg Code, which remains an 
essential foundation for regulation of human medical 
experimentation into the 21st century. The war crimes 
and crimes against humanity committed during World 
War II were the impetus for adoption of the Geneva 
Conventions of 1949. Subsequent sections of this chapter will cover the basic medical protections addressed 
in those treaties and discuss some of the challenging 
settings in which the rules are applied. 
Intent of the Law of Armed Conflict in Relation to 
Military Medicine 
The Geneva Conventions of 1949, which established 
the extensive modern-day rules on the roles and 
responsibilities of medical personnel during armed 
conflict, included four treaties:
 
• The Geneva Convention for the Amelioration 
of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in 
Armed Forces in the Field of 12 August 1949 
(GC I) 
 
• The Geneva Convention for the Amelioration 
of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea of 
12 August 1949 (GC II)
 
• The Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August 1949 
(GC III)
 
• The Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 
August 1949 (GC IV)
The United States is a party to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which have been ratified by the US Senate, and therefore the nation is bound by the provisions 
of these treaties. Text from the Geneva Conventions 
is quoted frequently in this chapter to highlight key 
rules and concepts.
Though they have not been ratified by the United 
States and are therefore not binding on this country, it 
is worth noting that widely known legal instruments 
called the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions were adopted at a diplomatic conference 
in Geneva in 1977. A number of countries, including 
the United States, participated in this conference for 
the purpose of adopting these Protocols to enhance 
and update the 1949 Geneva Conventions. They are 
known formally as the Protocols Additional to the 
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating 
to the Protection of Victims of International Armed 
Conflicts (Protocol I), of 8 June 1977, and the Protocol 
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 
1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of NonInternational Conflicts (Protocol II), of 8 June 1977. 
This chapter makes reference to the Protocols where 
awareness of them could be useful in work with the 
armed forces of states that have ratified them. 
The Geneva Conventions in their entirety “shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed 
conflict which may arise between two or more of the 
High Contracting Parties, even if the state of war is 
not recognized by one of them.”19 Requirements for 
MMOs are clear. “Members of the DOD Components 
comply with the law of war during all armed conflicts, 
however such conflicts are characterized, and in all 
other military operations.”20 This means MMOs must 
apply this Geneva law during armed conflict without 
exception. It is irrelevant to individual MMOs, and to 
their mission, as to whether or not a state of war or 
armed conflict is formally declared or recognized. The 
Geneva Conventions apply regardless. 
The fastest route to understanding the ethos and 
functional purpose of the Geneva Conventions of 
1949 is to read the concise provisions of the famous 
“Common Article 3,”which sets out the absolute minimum protections that must be applied in any armed 
conflict21:
ART. 3. In the case of armed conflict not of an international character occurring in the territory of one of 
the High Contracting Parties, each Party to the conflict shall be bound to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions: 
 
1) Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, 
including members of armed forces who have 
laid down their arms and those placed hors 
de combat by sickness, wounds, detention, or 
any other cause, shall in all circumstances 
be treated humanely, without any adverse 
distinction founded on race, colour, religion 
or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any other 
similar criteria. 
 
 To this end, the following acts are and shall 
96
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
remain prohibited at any time and in any 
place whatsoever with respect to the abovementioned persons: 
 
a) violence to life and person, in particular 
murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel 
treatment and torture;
 
b) taking of hostages; 
 
c) outrages upon personal dignity, in 
particular humiliating and degrading 
treatment; 
 
d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous 
judgment pronounced by a regularly 
constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as 
indispensable by civilized peoples. 
 
2) The wounded and sick shall be collected and 
cared for. 
An impartial humanitarian body, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross, may offer its 
services to the Parties to the conflict. 
The Parties to the conflict should further endeavour 
to bring into force, by means of special agreements, 
all or part of the other provisions of the present Convention.
The application of the preceding provisions shall not 
affect the legal status of the Parties to the conflict. 22
Article 3 is an exception to the other text found in 
each treaty of the four Geneva Conventions because 
it applies in all cases of armed conflict “not of an international character occurring in the territory of one 
of the High Contracting Parties.”22 This means that 
Article 3 applies during civil wars and other forms 
of armed conflict taking place within the borders 
of a single country. All other articles of the Geneva 
Conventions of 1949 apply in their entirety during 
international armed conflict (meaning military conflict 
between two or more states, as countries are termed 
under international law), and MMOs must apply the 
provisions of the treaties in full, rather than the more 
limited provisions of Common Article 3. 
Though Common Article 3 lacks the detailed guidance found in the other articles of the full Conventions, if read carefully, it provides a distillation of the 
core principles of the law of armed conflict. Common 
Article 3 should be read to provide MMOs an orientation to the basic purposes of the law of war. Then, 
studying the detailed description of the more complete 
medical requirements of the Geneva Conventions, 
which apply during international armed conflict, will 
provide a fuller picture of the MMO’s professional 
responsibilities. 
Status of Military Medical Units and Personnel
During international armed conflict, the Geneva 
Conventions for Wounded and Sick (GC I), and for 
Wounded, Sick, and Shipwrecked (GC II) identify 
“[f]ixed establishments and mobile medical units” of 
military medical services as the principal providers of 
medical assistance. 23 Hospital ships are authorized to 
provide these services at sea subject to requirements for 
advance notification of their status. 24 Medical aircraft 
“exclusively employed for the removal of wounded 
and sick and for the transport of medical personnel 
and equipment” are recognized as protected under the 
Geneva Conventions. The same protection applies for 
aircraft transporting the shipwrecked. 25 (For further 
information, see Joint Publication 4-02. 26) Activities 
essential for medical support are protected as well. On 
land, these include “transports of wounded and sick 
or of medical equipment.”27 At sea, ships chartered 
“to transport equipment exclusively intended for the 
treatment of wounded and sick members of the armed 
forces or for the prevention of disease” are also protected if advance notice of their voyage is provided. 28
Within military medical units, those medical personnel “exclusively engaged in the search for, or the 
collection, transport or treatment of the wounded or 
sick, or in the prevention of disease, staff exclusively 
engaged in the administration of medical units and 
establishments, as well as chaplains attached to the 
armed forces” hold protected status under the law 
of armed conflict. 29 The same status is provided for 
“religious, medical and hospital personnel of hospital 
ships and their crews”30 and for the same category 
of personnel serving on other ships. 31 Coastal rescue 
craft are to be respected on the same terms “so far as 
operational requirements permit.”32
MMOs should keep in mind that under the Geneva 
Conventions, the only military personnel entitled to 
continuous medical standing, privileges, and protection are those “exclusively engaged” in medical duties 
as described above. Other military personnel “specially 
trained for employment, should the need arise, as hospital orderlies, nurses or auxiliary stretcher-bearers, in 
the search for or the collection, transport or treatment 
of the wounded and sick shall likewise be respected 
and protected if they are carrying out these duties 
at the time when they come into contact with the 
enemy or fall into his hands.”33 To ensure continued 
protection of medical units, personnel, and activities, 
all staff should be managed in a manner that ensures 
no blurring of distinctions between work carried out 
by medical and other military personnel (cautionary 
guidance on activities that exceed medically protected 
roles is provided in Joint Publication 4-0226). 
97
The Law of Armed Conflict and Military Medicine
Though (if recent history is any guide) civilian volunteers and aid societies are unlikely to be recruited to 
assist US military medical units in care for the wounded 
and sick of US and friendly forces, this contingency is 
provided for by the Geneva Conventions. Given the 
changing context of military medicine in war zones, it 
is not beyond question that such assistance may someday be requested again. Medical status is provided 
for “staff of National Red Cross Societies and that of 
other Voluntary Aid Societies, duly recognized and 
authorized by their governments” providing the same 
support as full-time military medical personnel and also 
“subject to military laws and regulations.”34 Analogous 
humanitarian support is also addressed in the maritime 
domain. “Hospital ships utilized by National Red Cross 
Societies, by officially recognized relief societies or by 
private persons” have the same protection as military 
hospital ships if commissioned for that role, and the 
same notification procedures that apply for military 
hospital ships would be complied with as well. 35
Less formal relief efforts by civilians are also contemplated in Geneva law and have historical precedent. During the American Civil War, for example, 
individual and organized groups of civilians rendered 
extraordinary assistance to wounded and sick soldiers 
on and off the battlefield. 36 Under the Geneva Conventions, military authorities “may appeal to the charity 
of the inhabitants voluntarily to collect and care for, 
under their direction, the wounded and sick, granting 
persons who have responded to this appeal the necessary protection and facilities.”37 Similarly, an appeal 
may be made to “the charity of commanders of neutral 
merchant vessels, yachts or other craft” to assist with 
rescue of the wounded, sick, and shipwrecked at sea. 
Protection will be provided to such vessels and others 
that render such assistance. 38
Responsibilities and Protections of Military Medical Personnel and Units During Armed Conflict
The units and personnel identified for protection 
under the Geneva Conventions assume challenging 
humanitarian responsibilities. They commit to strict 
limitations on their scope of activities. The scope of permitted duties is considered here in relation to potential 
harm that may follow if these requirements are not met.
The Geneva Conventions apply for protection of all 
wounded and sick “Members of the armed forces of a 
Party to the conflict as well as members of the militias 
or volunteer corps forming part of such armed forces.” 
There are also detailed provisions on other categories 
of combatants covered by the protections of the Geneva 
Conventions. 39 MMOs must, therefore, be ready for 
missions that differ conceptually in scope from their 
peacetime support for US military personnel and their 
families. In addition to those continuing responsibilities, they must expand their medical support paradigm 
to render medical assistance to all combatants, including captured enemy wounded. 40
The broad scope of medical assistance set out in 
the Geneva Conventions warrants verbatim inclusion 
here, as set out in GC I:
Members of the armed forces and other persons mentioned in the following Article, who are wounded or 
sick, shall be respected and protected in all circumstances. 
They shall be treated humanely and cared for by the 
Party to the conflict in whose power they may be, 
without any adverse distinction founded on sex, race, 
nationality, religion, political opinions, or any other 
similar criteria. Any attempts upon their lives, or violence to their persons, shall be strictly prohibited; in 
particular, they shall not be murdered or exterminated, subjected to torture or to biological experiments; 
they shall not wilfully be left without medical assistance and care, nor shall conditions exposing them to 
contagion or infection be created.
Only urgent medical reasons will authorize priority 
in the order of treatment to be administered. 
Women shall be treated with all consideration due 
to their sex. 
The Party to the conflict which is compelled to abandon wounded or sick to the enemy shall, as far as 
military considerations permit, leave with them a 
part of its medical personnel and material to assist 
in their care. 40
The Geneva Conventions also highlight the extension of an MMO’s professional obligations beyond the 
wounded, sick, and shipwrecked members of armed 
forces. Though the Geneva Conventions focus on the 
role of military medical personnel and units in connection with medical care for these categories of personnel, there are also important provisions requiring 
medical treatment and careful attention to the public 
health needs of other categories of people as well. In 
fulfillment of those obligations, MMOs may be tasked 
to assist with public health needs and medical treatment for enemy who are prisoners of war, civilian 
detainees, civilians living under military occupation, 
and civilians who are wounded, sick, infirm or pregnant. 41 Other important humanitarian obligations set 
out in the Geneva Conventions relate to notification, 
disposition of human remains, and return of personal 
effects when a patient has died. 42
98
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
Military medical units and establishments are 
protected from attack in order to ensure that medical 
work can be carried out for all wounded, sick, and 
shipwrecked combatants without distinction. “Fixed 
establishments” and “mobile medical units” of military 
medical services “may in no circumstances be attacked, 
but shall at all times be respected and protected” by all 
sides in the conflict. 43 Military hospital ships bear the 
same protection, and sick bays on other military ships 
“shall be respected and spared as far as possible.”44
Medical services of armed forces are authorized to 
use a specific identifying emblem recognized under the 
provisions of the Geneva Conventions. Accordingly, 
the Red Cross or Red Crescent emblem, displayed on 
a white ground, may be employed for this purpose. 45 
A Red Crystal emblem was also authorized more recently. Israel employs a Red Shield of David in lieu of 
a Red Cross or Red Crescent emblem. (The complex 
background to the development and use of these 
emblems is summarized in the DoD Law of War Manual. 46) If a medical facility, establishment, or activity 
is known to the other side, it should be respected and 
thus spared from attack even if a protected emblem 
is not in use. 26 Military medical personnel covered by 
the Geneva Conventions are also identified by wearing, “affixed to the left arm, a water-resistant armlet 
bearing the distinctive emblem, issued and stamped 
by the military authority.”47
The “medical personnel exclusively engaged in the 
search for, or the collection, transport or treatment of 
the wounded or sick, or in the prevention of disease, 
staff exclusively engaged in the administration of 
medical units and establishments, as well as chaplains attached to the armed forces”29 are not deemed 
to be prisoners of war if captured. They are “retained 
personnel” and held “only in so far as the state of 
health, the spiritual needs and the number of prisoners of war require.”48 Medical hospital ships (“built or 
equipped . . . specially and solely with a view to assisting the wounded, sick and shipwrecked”) may not 
be attacked or captured. Other hospital ships can also 
acquire protection where they have been authorized 
for such service and notice provided to all parties. 49 
Similar status, authority to continue medical work, 
and provision for release apply to military medical 
personnel captured while serving at sea as applies to 
medical personnel serving on land. 31
There are, however, strict requirements that must be 
met for medical personnel to sustain protected status. 
The Geneva Conventions anticipate situations in which 
protection may be lost. “The protection to which fixed 
establishments and mobile medical units of the Medical Service are entitled shall not cease unless they are 
used to commit, outside their humanitarian duties, acts 
harmful to the enemy. Protection may, however, cease 
only after a due warning has been given, naming, in 
all appropriate cases, a reasonable time limit and after 
such warning has remained unheeded.”50 The same 
restrictions apply to employment of hospital ships and 
sick bays of other vessels. 51
This discussion inevitably raises questions about 
practical security of military personnel and medical 
establishments and facilities. The law of war recognizes armed security requirements. Medical personnel 
may be armed for their own defense and that of their 
patients. Armed security for the unit or establishment 
may be posted by orderlies, sentries, picket, or escort. 
None of these measures jeopardize the legal protection 
of medical units or establishments. 52 Armed security 
is also authorized on hospital ships (and sick bays of 
other vessels), and it does not deprive them of protected status. 53
Medical Operations Conducted in Cooperation 
With Coalition Partners
The US armed forces have worked with international partners since the American Revolution, 
but this practice has accelerated in the 21st century. 
MMOs should expect many and perhaps most of 
their deployments to take place in partnership with 
the armed forces of international partners. Some 
of these forces have worked with US forces on a 
sustained basis in formal, treaty-based alliances. In 
such instances, there may be longstanding combined 
operational experience and logistical standardization. 
Other, less formal cooperative operations are called 
coalitions and often include newer partners. In either 
instance, important law of war responsibilities apply 
in armed conflict. 
If enemy wounded and sick are transferred to an 
ally or coalition partner by US military authorities, 
the United States remains responsible for correction 
of any important medical or other failures of proper 
treatment when such are brought to the attention of US 
personnel. In fact, such transfer can only take place if 
the party receiving the enemy prisoners of war is itself 
a party to the applicable GC III on prisoners of war and 
has shown its “willingness and ability” to apply that 
treaty. If such deficiencies are not corrected, then the 
United States must request and secure return of the 
prisoners. 54 More nuanced issues may also arise that 
involve differing approaches to appropriate standard 
of care under the law of armed conflict. 55
US military medical capabilities in most instances 
exceed those of allies and coalition partners. However, 
it should be kept in mind that though the United States 
has not ratified Additional Protocol I to the Geneva 
99
The Law of Armed Conflict and Military Medicine
Conventions of 1977, sometimes allies and coalition 
partners have. For example, this protocol merges 
the concept of wounded and sick to include military 
wounded, sick, and shipwrecked under GC I and GC 
II with civilians in need of medical care under GC 
IV. 56 US medical officers should be aware that difPROTECTION OF CIVILIAN MEDICAL STAFF AND HOSPITALS IN ARMED CONFLICT
ferences of interpretation may consequently arise in 
some circumstances regarding medical requirements 
and standards of care. 55 In some instances, the United 
States considers provisions of the Protocols Additional 
to reflect principles of customary law, and such customary principles are implemented. 57 
Historically, the missions of military medical units 
have overlapped with those of civilian medical staff 
and facilities only on an incidental basis. Greater 
expectations for coordinated care now exist, and 
deploying MMOs must be prepared for cooperation 
with healthcare professionals who are treating civilian 
patients. 58As previously discussed in the War Crimes 
section, and as can be seen from monitoring world 
news, civilian hospitals and staff sometimes face extremely dangerous conditions in which medical staff 
and patients are deliberately targeted. 59 
During international armed conflict, civilian medical staff are protected in their work under GC IV on 
terms analogous to those that apply to military medical 
staff and facilities. During armed conflicts internal to 
a country, such as a civil war, civilian medical practitioners and activities are entitled at a minimum to the 
protections afforded by Common Article 3. During 
international armed conflict, under GC IV, “Civilian 
hospitals organized to give care to the wounded and 
sick, the infirm and maternity cases, may in no circumstances be the object of attack, but shall at all times be 
respected and protected by the Parties to the conflict.”60
Regarding hospital staff, “Persons regularly and 
solely engaged in the operation and administration 
of civilian hospitals, including the personnel engaged 
in the search for, removal and transporting of and 
caring for wounded and sick civilians, the infirm and 
maternity cases, shall be respected and protected.”61 
Such hospitals shall be marked by a protective emblem 
if authorized by a state that is party to the armed conflict, and authorized medical personnel shall wear on 
the left arm an armlet displaying a protected emblem 
“while carrying out their duties.”60–62 Protections for 
such civilian hospitals “shall not cease unless they are 
used to commit, outside their humanitarian duties, acts 
harmful to the enemy. Protection may, however, cease 
only after due warning has been given, naming, in all 
appropriate cases, a reasonable time limit, and after 
such warning has remained unheeded.”62
Other special protection arrangements can be made 
under GC IV. This treaty authorizes, by mutual agreement of all sides, the establishment of “hospital and 
safety zones and localities so organized as to protect 
from the effects of war, wounded, sick and aged persons, children under fifteen, expectant mothers and 
mothers of children under seven.”63 GC IV also provides that belligerents may agree to the establishment 
of “neutralized zones intended to shelter from the effects of war the following persons, without distinction:
 (a) wounded and sick combatants or non-combatants;
 (b) civilian persons who take no part in hostilities, and who, while they reside in the zones, 
perform no work of a military character.”64
MMOs may also come into contact with the International Committee of the Red Cross, a humanitarian 
organization recognized under the Geneva Conventions as bearing special responsibility to provide 
protective assistance to prisoners of war, civilians, 
and the wounded, sick, and shipwrecked during 
armed conflict. 65 Officially chartered and recognized 
National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, as well 
as other relief societies, sometimes broadly referred to 
as nongovernmental organizations (or NGOs or PVOs 
[private voluntary organizations]), may also provide 
civilian relief “subject to temporary and exceptional 
measures imposed for urgent reasons of security . . . ”66
 APPLICATION OF INTERNATIONAL LAW IN PEACETIME MEDICAL DEPLOYMENTS
The medical dimensions of international law are 
most developed in relation to services provided for 
combatants and civilians during armed conflict. The 
extensive guidance and rules on medical operations 
contained in the Geneva Conventions of 1949 have 
no medical equivalent in treaties that apply in peacetime. However, some fundamental human rights and 
humanitarian law protections must always be taken 
into account. 
International human rights law provides important 
peacetime human rights protections and is a dynamic, 
developing field. Of particular note in connection 
with peacetime deployments is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,67 a resolution adopted by the 
100
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
United Nations (UN) General Assembly in 1948. This 
resolution and the UN treaty called the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 196668 are 
landmark instruments establishing a foundation for 
human rights protection that imposes rules on governments for their treatment of human beings.
 Human rights treaties all apply in peacetime, and 
some of them apply in times of armed conflict as well. 
Prior reference was made to one such treaty, the UN 
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the 
Crime of Genocide. Torture is also prohibited, in both 
peacetime and wartime, by the Convention against 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment of 1984, as it is during 
armed conflict by the Geneva Conventions. 69,70
A full survey of international human rights law 
exceeds the scope of this chapter. However, it should 
be kept in mind that governments have international 
legal obligations to treat their populace humanely 
and ensure their human rights in peacetime as well as 
during armed conflict. Just as the law of armed conflict 
never excuses states from their obligation to fulfill 
humanitarian obligations in wartime, international 
human rights law similarly obligates them to do the 
same for their population during peacetime disasters 
and emergencies in which MMOs may deploy as part 
of a foreign humanitarian assistance mission. 
MMOs must be highly alert for situations in which 
individuals or groups might face persecution, discrimination, or mistreatment at the hands of host nation authorities, or may find themselves deprived of 
assistance by their government during medical and 
humanitarian relief operations. Higher headquarters 
must immediately be notified if such issues or evidence arises. The tragedy inherent in the consequential 
human suffering, and loss of life, could also further 
aggravate festering social and political problems and 
magnify security challenges. Additionally, potential 
goodwill could be thwarted through guilt by association. Just as a wartime crime by a coalition partner can 
tarnish the credibility and reputation of the United 
States, the same could happen if a host nation abuses 
or neglects all or portions of its population, or individuals who have been singled out, during a peacetime 
emergency. 
Less traumatic but important issues may arise pertaining to the Constitution of the World Health Organization, which promises a “right to health,” and to a 
treaty that was widely ratified (but not by the United 
States to date) that “recognizes the right of everyone 
to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard 
of physical and mental health.”71,72 The term “right to 
health” is interpreted to mean “the highest attainable 
standard of health.”73 However, interpretations of the 
full scope of the meaning and implementation of a 
right to health may vary. Allies and coalition partners 
in medical development initiatives may have differing 
views on what this means and promises. 
CONCLUSION
MMOs are responsible for ensuring medical personnel and units maintain protected legal status and fulfill 
service delivery requirements that the US government 
tasks to them in accordance with the Geneva Conventions. These are solemn national commitments that 
MMOs and other military medical personnel have 
fulfilled for generations. To continue this tradition, 
new MMOs should be able to visualize the medical 
dimensions of the law of armed conflict as an essential 
component of the mission—a medical form of commander’s intent. 
MMO leadership in ensuring compliance with the 
medical aspects of the Geneva Conventions serves a 
high calling that exceeds patient needs and the national 
commitment to honor these rules. By implementing 
medical ethics in wartime, MMOs help ensure the continued viability and credibility of the law of armed conflict for the present time and the generations to follow.
REFERENCES
 
1. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): section 1. 8. 
 
2. Wright JW. Sieges and customs of war at the opening of the eighteenth century. Am Hist Rev. 1934;39(4):629–644.
 
3. US Army Medical Department, Office of Medical History. Extract from Medical Department, US Army. Preventive 
Medicine In World War II. Vol. IX, special fields. http://history.amedd.army.mil/booksdocs/wwii/EPWs/EPWs.htm. 
Accessed May 11, 2018.
 
4. Reister F. Hospitalization in Korea. In: Battle Casualties and Medical Statistics, U.S. Army Experience in the Korean War. 
http://history.amedd.army.mil/booksdocs/korea/reister/ch4.html. Accessed May 11, 2018.
101
The Law of Armed Conflict and Military Medicine
 
5. Maxwell WQ. Lincoln’s Fifth Wheel: The Political History of the United States Sanitary Commission. New York, NY: Longmans, Green and Co; 1956: 271–276.
 
6. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): sections 4. 9-4. 13, 7. 1-7. 20.
 
7. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): sections 1. 3. 1, 1. 3. 2.
 
8. Wright DP, Reese TR. The United States Army in Operation Iraqi Freedom, May 2003–January 2005: On Point II: Transition 
to the New Campaign. Ft Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press; 2008: 346.
 
9. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): section 18. 2. 3.
 10. International Committee of the Red Cross. Annual reports, 2002–2016. https://www.icrc.org/en/annual-report. Accessed May 12, 2018.
 11. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): sections 18. 4. 1–18. 5. 3.
 12. Fouad M, Fouad MD, et al. Health workers and the weaponisation of health care in Syria: a preliminary inquiry for The 
Lancet-American University of Beirut Commission on Syria. Lancet. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/S0140-6736(17)307419. http://thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(17)30741-9/fulltext. Published March 14, 2017. Accessed 
October 20, 2017.
 13. Loveluck L, Zakaria Z. “The hospitals were slaughterhouses”: a journey into Syria’s torture wards. Washington Post. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/the-hospitals-were-slaughterhouses-a-journey-intosyrias-secrettorture-wards/2017/04/02/90ccaa6e-0d61-11e7-b2bb-417e331877d9_story.html?utm_term=. 93835e7b6fa9. Published 
April 2, 2017. Accessed October 20, 2017.
 14. McKay H. Syria’s secret caves serve as hospitals in a final lifeline to save victims. FoxNews.com. http://www.foxnews.
com/world/2017/04/06/syria-s-secret-caves-serve-as-hospitals-in-final-lifeline-to-save-victims.html. Published April 6, 
2017. Accessed October 20, 2017.
 15. Weintraub S. War in the Wards. San Rafael, CA: Presidio Press; 1976.
 16. Geneva Convention I, article 50. International Committee of the Red Cross. The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 
1949. https://www.icrc.org/eng/assets/files/publications/icrc-002-0173.pdf. Accessed May 11, 2018. 
 17. Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Part 7. United Nations website. http://www.un.org/law/icc/index.
html. Accessed October 20, 2017.
 18. UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, 1948. United Nations website. http://
www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=a/res/260(III). Accessed October 20, 2017.
 19. Geneva Convention I, article 2; Geneva Convention II, article 2; Geneva Convention III, article 2; Geneva Convention 
IV, article 2.
 20. US Department of Defense. DoD Law of War Program. Washington, DC: DoD; May 9, 2006. DoD Directive 2311. 01E.
 21. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): section 3. 1. 1. 2.
 22. Geneva Convention I, article 3; Geneva Convention II, article 3; Geneva Convention III, article 3; Geneva Convention 
IV, article 3.
 23. Geneva Convention I, article 19.
102
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
 24. Geneva Convention II, article 22.
 25. Geneva Convention I, article 36; Geneva Convention II, article 39.
 26. US Department of Defense. Joint Health Services. Washington, DC: DoD; December 11, 2017: appendix H: Impacts of 
the law of war and medical ethics, H-11. Joint Publication 4-02. http://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/
pubs/jp4_02.pdf. Accessed May 11, 2018.
 27. Geneva Convention I, article 35.
 28. Geneva Convention II, article 38.
 29. Geneva Convention I, article 24.
 30. Geneva Convention II, article 36.
 31. Geneva Convention II, article 37.
 32. Geneva Convention II, article 27.
 33. Geneva Convention I, article 25.
 34. Geneva Convention I, article 26.
 35. Geneva Convention II, article 24.
 36. Ernst KA. Too Afraid to Cry: Maryland Civilians in the Antietam Campaign. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books; 2007: 
168–181.
 37. Geneva Convention I, article 18.
 38. Geneva Convention II, article 21.
 39. Geneva Convention I, article 13; Geneva Convention 11, article 13; Geneva Convention III, article 4.
 40. Geneva Convention I, article 12; Geneva Convention II, article 12.
 41. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): sections 7. 16, 9. 14. 1–9. 14. 4, 10. 14. 1–10. 14. 1. 3.
 42. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): sections 7. 7. 2–7. 7. 5. 1.
 43. Geneva Convention I, articles 19, 28.
 44. Geneva Convention II, articles 22, 28
 45. Geneva Convention I, article 38; Geneva Convention II, article 41. 
 46. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016) sections 7. 15. 1–7. 15. 1. 4.
 47. Geneva Convention I, article 40; Geneva Convention II, article 42.
 48. Geneva Convention I, article 28.
 49. Geneva Convention II, articles 22, 24, 25.
103
The Law of Armed Conflict and Military Medicine
 50. Geneva Convention I, article 21.
 51. Geneva Convention II, article 34.
 52. Geneva Convention I, article 22.
 53. Geneva Convention II, article 35.
 54. Geneva Convention III, article 12.
 55. Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): sections 7. 20. 1–7. 20. 3.
 56. Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1977, article 8(a). International Committee of the Red Cross. Protocols 
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. https://www.icrc.org/eng/assets/files/other/icrc_002_0321.
pdf. Accessed May 11, 2018.
 57. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): section 1. 8. 1.
 58. US Department of Defense. Joint Health Services. Washington, DC: DoD; December 11, 2017: appendix J, Section B, 
Health Services Checklist for Stability Operations. Joint Publication 4-0, http://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/
Doctrine/pubs/jp4_02.pdf2. Accessed May 11, 2018.
 59. United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Reliefweb. https://reliefweb.int/. Accessed May 
14, 2018.
 60. Geneva Convention IV, article 18.
 61. Geneva Convention IV, article 20.
 62. Geneva Convention IV, article 19.
 63. Geneva Convention IV, article 14.
 64. Geneva Convention IV, article 15.
 65. Geneva Convention I, article 9; Geneva Convention II, article 9; Geneva Convention III, article 9; Geneva Convention 
IV, article 10.
 66. Geneva Convention IV, article 63.
 67. Universal Declaration of Human Rights. United Nations website. http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-humanrights/. Accessed October 20, 2017.
 68. United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. http://
www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx. Accessed May 11, 2018. 
 69. United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment. http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CAT.aspx. Accessed May 
11, 2018. 
 70. US Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: 
DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): section 1. 6. 3. 4.
 71. World Health Organization. Constitution of the World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/governance/eb/
who_constitution_en.pdf. Accessed October 20, 2017. 
104
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
 72. United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights, article 12. http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx. Accessed May 11, 2018.
 73. International Committee of the Red Cross. Health Care in Danger: The Responsibilities of Health-Care Personnel Working in 
Armed Conflicts and Other Emergencies. Geneva, Switzerland: ICRC; 2013: 37. https://www.icrc.org/en/publication/4104health-care-danger-responsibilities-health-care-personnel-working-armed-conflicts. Accessed May 11, 2018.
