51
Military Medical Leadership
Chapter 4
MILITARY MEDICAL LEADERSHIP
CHARLES W. CALLAHAN, DO,* and NEIL E. GRUNBERG, PhD† 
INTRODUCTION 
FOUR CE-PITO FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW
WHY DEVELOP MILITARY MEDICAL LEADERS?
WHY IS MILITARY MEDICAL LEADERSHIP IMPORTANT NOW?
HISTORY OF LEADERSHIP
ELEMENTS OF FOUR CE-PITO
Character
Competence
Context
Communication
PITO
HOW TO USE THE FOUR CE-PITO FRAMEWORK
SUMMARY
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army; Professor of Pediatrics, Military & Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland; Vice President, Population Health, University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland
†Professor, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
52
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION 
for his own part, in the sight of his general, desired 
to exert his utmost energy, the impetuosity of the enemy was a little checked. 1(ch25) 
Effective leadership was key to the success of 
Caesar’s army. His leadership involved character 
(he “advanced to the front of the line”); competence 
(“encouraging . . . the soldiers . . . to carry forward 
the standards”); comprehension of the context (“he 
perceived that his men were hard pressed . . . that the 
rest were slackening their efforts”); and clear communication (“addressing the centurions by name”). 1
Leadership is expected of military medical professionals, and is essential for the success of the Military 
Health System (MHS). Leadership is defined as the enhancement of behaviors (actions), cognitions (thoughts 
and beliefs), and motivations (reasons for actions and 
thoughts) to achieve goals that benefit individuals and 
groups. Military medical leadership must consider 
situations and interactions among healthcare team 
members, line commanders, and the public to achieve 
these goals. Leadership depends upon who the leader 
is; what the leaders knows and does; and where, when, 
and how the leader acts. The FourCe-PITO framework 
includes elements of various leadership models and 
is intended to increase the understanding, development, and evaluation of leaders and leadership. 2 The 
four Cs (character, competence, context, communication) address who, what, when and where, and how, 
respectively. PITO (personal, interpersonal, team, 
organizational) addresses levels of psychosocial interaction and awareness. While this chapter discusses the 
training construct utilized at the Uniformed Services 
University of Health Sciences, leadership training is a 
lifelong journey.
Leadership is the enhancement of behaviors, cognitions, and motivations to achieve goals that benefit 
individuals and groups. Military medical leadership 
must consider situations and interactions among 
healthcare team members, line commanders, and the 
public to achieve these goals. The FourCe-PITO leadership framework presented in this chapter includes 
four domains of leadership—character, competence, 
context, communication—across four levels of interaction—personal, interpersonal, team, organizational. 
This framework draws upon many leadership models 
and is intended to help develop adaptive and effective 
leaders. 
“Omnia uno tempore agenda” (“Everything had to 
be done at once”) is how Julius Caesar described his 
response to an attack by the Nervii, the fiercest of the 
Belgic tribes of northern Gaul (modern-day northern 
France), in 57 bce. The attack came at three different 
points on his flanks while part of his army was crossing a river and another part was setting up camp. 
At one point in the battle, his Twelfth Legion was 
hard-pressed, fighting too closely bunched together. 
Caesar described his own perception and actions in 
third person: 
He perceived that his men were hard pressed . . . 
he likewise perceived that the rest were slackening 
their efforts . . . having therefore snatched a shield 
from one of the soldiers in the rear (for he himself 
had come without a shield), he advanced to the front 
of the line, and addressing the centurions by name, 
and encouraging the rest of the soldiers, he ordered 
them to carry forward the standards and extend the 
companies, that they might the more easily use their 
swords. On his arrival, as hope was brought to the 
soldiers and their courage restored, while everyone 
FOUR CE-PITO FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW
The FourCe elements are consistent with Army,3 
Navy,4 and Air Force5 leadership concepts. Other 
models identify various “Cs of leadership.”6–12 The 
FourCe (or four C) domains are: 
 
• Character (“who” the leader is) refers to all aspects of the individual, including demographics, attributes, personality, attitudes, values, 
and physical characteristics. Self-awareness 
of character is critical for a leader to achieve 
optimal success. 
 
• Competence (“what” the leader knows and 
does) includes role-specific and transcendent 
leadership knowledge and skills (eg, critical 
thinking, decision-making, problem-solving, 
motivating others, emotional intelligence). 
Both types of knowledge and skills are learned, 
refined, and honed with experience and effort.
 
• Context (“when” and “where” leadership occurs) involves physical, psychological, social, 
and cultural environments. It also includes 
effects of stress and the importance of situational awareness.
 
• Communication (“how” leaders interact 
with followers) is sending and receiving information, verbally (oral and written words) 
and nonverbally (nonverbal elements of oral 
communication, body language, and facial 
53
Military Medical Leadership
expressions). Most models of leadership include communication as a competence. Communication is identified as its own domain to 
emphasize and highlight its importance. 
These four Cs of leadership occur across several 
psychological and social levels. The four psychosocial 
levels (PITO) were developed by the leadership training program at the US Air Force Academy. 13–15 
 
• Personal focuses on aspects of the individual 
leader and self-awareness.
 
• Interpersonal focuses on interactions between 
the leader and others (eg, patient, colleague, 
subordinate, superior officer).
 
• Team focuses on operations of small groups 
(eg, healthcare professionals) aligned around 
a shared task, goal, or purpose.
 
• Organizational focuses on large groups, institutions, and systems.
The FourCe domains and PITO levels overlap, 
interact, and operate together. The FourCe-PITO 
framework is relevant to education, development, and 
assessment of leaders (ie, the persons who lead) and of 
leadership (ie, the relationships and culture of aspiration and inspiration). The FourCe-PITO framework is 
intended to be inclusive and comprehensive. 
WHY DEVELOP MILITARY MEDICAL LEADERS?
For the past 40 years, the Harris poll has asked Americans whether they had confidence in the leadership of 
American institutions. For as many years, medicine has 
ranked among the top groups that inspired confidence 
among those polled. 16 In 2014, the medical doctor was 
considered to be the most prestigious occupation in the 
United States by another Harris poll. 17 Physicians and 
medical professionals are expected to lead.
The military officer was the second most prestigious 
profession in America, according to the 2014 Harris poll, 
rated as “prestigious” by 78% of Americans, just behind 
physicians (88%). Nurses also were listed in the top five 
professions. America has “a great deal” of confidence in 
military leadership according to both Harris and Gallup polls. 16,18 In fact, military leadership has been highly 
ranked in Harris polls as confidence inspiring for decades. 
In the United States, the military epitomizes leadership. 
American military officers are expected to and must lead. 
Despite these high expectations of leadership 
from physicians and military officers, a 2011 report 
of the RAND Corporation in collaboration with 
the MHS Office of Transformation, titled Developing Custodians of Care, indicated a need to improve 
healthcare leadership development within the 
MHS. 19 This call was consistent with the 2008 Affordable Care Act’s focus on the development of 
“accountable care organizations” in which “doctors, hospitals, and health care providers come 
together voluntarily to give coordinated high 
quality care to the Medicare patients they serve.”20 
Physician medical leadership is necessary for the 
healthcare system to be effective, efficient, and accountable. For the MHS, which serves the nation’s 
warriors and their families, physician leadership 
to optimize performance, safety, and effectiveness, 
while containing costs, is essential.
WHY IS MILITARY MEDICAL LEADERSHIP IMPORTANT NOW?
The MHS is the only American healthcare system 
that goes to war. Uniformed providers and staff have 
deployed increasingly since the Vietnam War for 
military, humanitarian, and stability operations. 21 Since 
2001 the MHS has provided continuous forward care 
for wounded, ill, and injured in the wars in the Middle 
East—the longest war fought by volunteers in this 
nation’s history. Moving back and forth between the 
theater of war and home-based hospitals, professionals 
have frequently cared for the same patients they saw 
in combat when they returned to their duty stations 
in the United States. 
The MHS serves 9. 7 million beneficiaries directly 
through a system of Department of Defense (DoD) 
military medical treatment facilities (MTFs), including 56 hospitals and 365 clinics, as well as through 
civilian care purchased from private providers where 
uniformed care is unavailable. The MHS is the world’s 
largest global integrated healthcare system, operating 
on every continent and employing roughly 58,000 civilians and 86,000 military personnel. 22 According to the 
Congressional Budget Office, in fiscal year 2013 the 
MHS budget exceeded $50 billion for the first time, accounting for more than 10% of the DoD budget. When 
combined with the Department of Veterans Affairs, 
the largest integrated healthcare system in the United 
States, the two federal organizations provide care to 
14 million people at a cost of $104 billion, representing 
11% of all federal healthcare costs. 23
Healthcare costs in the MHS have increased fivefold since 2001. 23 As one government official said, “Today, we’re on the path in the Department of Defense 
54
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
to turn it into a benefits company that may occasionally kill a terrorist.”24 The rising healthcare cost of the 
MHS cannot be sustained. In the United States, the 
imperative to deliver quality care while cutting costs 
and eliminating system variation requires thoughtful 
and effective leadership.
Residents training in primary care programs today (family medicine, pediatrics, internal medicine) 
still provide the bulk of inpatient care coverage for 
children and adults, but they do so with one-fifth less 
training time since the 80-hour work week became the 
standard a decade ago (compared to the previously 
“standard” 100-hour work week). As the inpatient 
census drops in hospitals across the nation, trainees 
may have decreased overall patient experience because 
of diminished patient exposure. At the same time, the 
care of critically ill hospitalized patients has become 
more complex. 25 Designing safe systems to care for 
these complex patients with less experienced personnel requires leadership.
The days of all-knowing, “one-stop-shop” physicians, or physicians always available for house calls, 
are long past. Increasingly, patients in the hospital 
and in the clinic require multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary care teams of professionals to assure the 
highest outcomes. 25 Healthcare in the 21st century 
involves a team of primary care physicians, specialists, 
nurses, psychologists, social workers, dentists, physical therapists, occupational therapists, and others. 
Leading these teams requires professionals who can 
seamlessly move back and forth from hierarchical to 
shared leadership roles as different therapists and providers take the lead during various aspects of patient 
care. Juggling to attain a balance between complex and 
dynamic care team scenarios requires well-developed 
leadership skills. 
Finally, the challenges and scrutiny that face today’s military healthcare leaders are only increasing. 
A recent lay publication noted that nearly one in five 
military healthcare leaders of major Army healthcare 
facilities in 2014 were either relieved or suspended. 26 
Future military healthcare leaders must be acutely 
aware of the concepts of moral, ethical, and legal leadership and understand the terminology and impact of 
“toxic” leadership. They must be able to distinguish the 
differences among strategic, operational, and tactical 
leadership, and understand that tactical-level decisions 
can have strategic-level implications.
HISTORY OF LEADERSHIP
Interest in and discussion of leaders and leadership 
date back millennia, appearing in Homer’s Iliad, the Old 
Testament, the New Testament, the Bhagavad Gita, and 
the Koran. These historical texts emphasized personal 
and physical characteristics and abilities of individual 
leaders. The empirical study of leadership began in the 
mid-20th century and was pioneered by Kurt Lewin, 
the “father” of experimental social psychology. 27 Lewin 
identified three different leadership styles—autocratic, 
laissez-faire, and democratic—and studied group dynamics among leaders and followers. During the latter 
half of the 20th century, there was an explosion of definitions, conceptualizations, and studies of leadership. With 
this increased attention to “what is leadership” came 
different views emphasizing individual characteristics 
and traits of the leader and the led; social interactions 
and group dynamics; processes and goals; situational 
influences; relevant knowledge and skills; and many 
other individual, interpersonal, and group distinctions. 
In the last decades of the 20th century, group processes became the focus, highlighting how the leader 
and members of the group interact, including transactional (focusing on behaviors), transformational 
(focusing on motivations), servant (focusing on 
mission and followers), and authentic (focusing on 
leaders’ communication) leadership. More recently, 
Heifetz28 emphasized leadership through adaptive 
work versus technical work and the challenges of 
leading with and without authority. Kolditz29 emphasized leadership in extreme situations. Pearce30 
emphasized the importance of self-awareness and 
expressions of one’s emotions in concert with cognitions for leaders to communicate effectively. Day 
and Antonakis combined aspects of the individual 
leader, group processes, and leadership context in 
describing leadership as “an influencing process and 
its resultant outcomes that occurs between a leader 
and followers, and how this influencing process is 
explained by the leader’s dispositional characteristics and behaviors, follower perceptions, leader 
attributes, and the context in which the influencing 
process takes place”31 (see Day and Antonakis32 and 
Northouse33 for detailed discussions of leadership 
theories and styles). 
ELEMENTS OF FOURCE-PITO
The definition of leadership offered in this chapter 
was developed to capture concepts and findings from 
extant leadership literature. As mentioned above, 
leadership is defined here as the enhancement of behaviors (actions), cognitions (thoughts and beliefs), 
and motivations (reasons for actions and thoughts) 
55
Military Medical Leadership
to achieve goals that benefit individuals and groups. 
This wording includes the overlapping elements of 
psychology (behavior, cognition, motivations); the 
influence of leadership as an “enhancer” of these 
elements; and the end result of achieving or attaining goals (physical, psychological, and/or social) for 
the welfare of individuals or groups. The elements of 
the FourCe-PITO framework and their relevance to 
development and evaluation of leaders are described 
in more detail below. 
Character
Krishna, Moses, Buddha, Jesus, Muhammad; 
Washington, Lincoln, FDR, Victoria, Thatcher; Gandhi, King, Mandela; Carnegie, Rockefeller, Gates; 
Newton, Darwin, Pasteur, Freud; Lovell, Letterman, 
Sternberg, Gihon, Rixey, Stokes, Carlton: individual 
leaders have emerged in belief systems, politics, business, science, and military medicine. These impressive 
individuals had powerful and admirable elements of 
character that helped them attain status and effectiveness as leaders. 
Character includes all aspects of who we are 
physically, psychologically, and demographically. 
It includes personality, attributes, values, attitudes, 
appearance, aspirations, temperament, and so on. 
Everyone can become a leader, but we must know 
who we are and others’ perceptions of who we are to 
become effective leaders. It is important to understand 
what aspects of self contribute to success as leaders and 
what aspects of self detract from effective leadership. 
Among the many aspects of character, self-confidence, 
humility, integrity, trustworthiness, responsibility, 
optimism, and empathy are particularly important to 
successful leadership.
Individual qualities of leaders have been an interest for as long as people have formed groups. The 
“savannah” hypothesis of leadership emphasized 
leader physical strength, stamina, and extraversion 
for small groups of human ancestors on the African 
plains. 34 Ancient literature is replete with examples 
of leader behavior with an emphasis on individual 
characteristics: those who are leaders because of position (eg, ex officio as king); physical size, strength, 
or looks; or individual personality traits or charisma. 
Homer’s epic poems the Iliad and the Odyssey, written 
more than two millennia ago, present various models 
of leadership in the characters of Agamemnon (leader 
because he was the Greek king who led his countrymen against the Trojans), Achilles (leader because of 
his demigod warrior status), Ajax (leader because of 
his size and strength), Odysseus (leader because of his 
cunning), and Hector (leader because of his courage 
and dedication to his people). 35 
In the Old Testament, Joshua was challenged with 
the universal warrior’s standard of personal leadership: “Be strong and courageous, do not tremble nor 
be afraid.”36 In Beowulf (an Anglo-Saxon poem, ca 
1,000 ce), a young prince’s behavior is recognized 
as affecting those who follow: “By praise-worthy actions must honor be got,” or alternatively, “Behavior 
that’s admired is the path to power among people 
everywhere.”37 
Early writings on leadership and social behavior focused on the leader and the leader’s character. Carlyle 
wrote, “the history of what man has accomplished in 
this world, is at the bottom the History of the Great 
Men who have worked here.”38 Carlyle’s emphasis on 
the character of the individual leader gave rise to the 
“great man” theory of leadership.
Genetic factors can impact “leader emergence.” 
Twin studies of both genders suggest that up to 30% 
of the differences that lead to leadership roles could 
be the result of genetic factors,39,40 leaving 70% to environment, education, training, and experience. There is 
not a significant correlation between intelligence and 
leader role occupancy, leader advancement, or motivation in children or adults. However, the extraversion 
temperament style is a predictor of leader emergence, 
along with the personality traits of conscientiousness, 
emotional stability, and openness to experience. 41 
Children ages 2 to 16 years who are more accepting of 
new situations, are more extroverted as adolescents, 
and develop greater social skills are more frequently 
found to have work-related leadership responsibilities. 42 “Nature” plays a part in who becomes a leader, 
but “nurture” carries the day. Leadership can and 
should be taught and developed.
Leader traits as a reflection of temperament and 
personality also may affect the leader’s dominant style. 
Lewin and Lippitt studied school children and identified three different leadership styles: authoritarian 
(autocratic), participative (democratic), and delegative 
(laissez-faire). Autocratic style tended to yield high 
productivity with low creativity. The democratic style 
participants were less productive but more creative, 
and the delegative style was the least productive of 
the three. 43 Although the three classic styles identified 
by Lewin,43 as well as other styles (eg, authentic, servant, transactional, and transformational leadership), 
may come more “naturally” to some, all styles can be 
learned. Also, the context (including culture, stress, 
and time pressures) alters the effectiveness of various 
leadership styles, reflecting the overlap among the 
FourCe dimensions. 
Weber introduced the term “charisma” (from the 
Greek “favored”) to describe a leader who was imbued with special gifts that empowered him or her to 
bring about social change. 44 A substantial amount of 
56
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
leader research has focused on charismatic, transformational leaders. According to Bass, these gifted men 
and women “by the power of their person have profound and extraordinary effects on their followers.”45 
This transformational style has been presented as a 
contrast to the more “transactional style” characterized by “a process of exchange” that is similar to an 
economic contract and depends on “the good faith 
of the participants.”46 Charisma, recast as “idealized 
influence” by leadership researchers, is different than 
transactional leadership in that “transformational leaders shift goals of followers away from personal safety 
and security toward achievement, self-actualization, 
and the greater good.”47 
Business consultant and contemporary leadership 
scholar Jim Collins surveyed successful companies that 
he wrote about in his 2001 best-seller, Good to Great. 
His research team concluded that the companies that 
exceeded their peers’ economic performance were 
led consistently by what he termed “Level 5” leaders. 
These leaders demonstrated traits and behaviors that 
he characterized as “a paradoxical mix of personal 
humility and professional will.”48 
It is clear that a leader’s character, including personality (with emphasis on confidence, trustworthiness, 
and resilience/hardiness) and emotional intelligence 
affect leadership effectiveness. Emotional intelligence, 
discussed below in more detail under “Competence,” 
can be learned and developed, even though there are 
clear differences among individuals. It includes essential aspects of “relationship management,” and is 
a strong predictor of successful leadership. Because 
leadership effectiveness relies on interactions with followers, leader competence and the followers’ response 
to the leader are critical.
Competence
Competence refers to abilities, skills, and knowledge 
relevant to leadership that transcend various roles, 
professions, and responsibilities. Competence also 
refers to the abilities, skills, and knowledge specific to 
particular roles, professions, and responsibilities of 
relevance to a leadership position. Lack of individual 
professional and technical competence creates additional leadership challenges, and leaders should have 
a working understanding of the professional and technical competence specific to the role, but transcendent 
leadership competence is particularly important.
Effective leadership competence that transcends 
particular leadership roles includes management skills, 
problem-solving skills, emotional intelligence, and 
ability to influence and inspire followers. It is crucial 
for leaders to develop excellent problem analysis, critical thinking, and decision-making competencies. To 
develop these skills requires awareness of cognitive 
biases and various heuristics that affect perception of 
information. It is useful to be knowledgeable about 
principles of social psychology and group dynamics 
that influence interpersonal relationships and willingness to express ideas. 49,50 Thoughtful and critical 
decision-making that encourages and considers broad 
input from the members of the group requires practice, 
feedback, and more practice. 
The extent to which a leader needs management 
skills depends on the context, including the organization and culture. According to management expert Peter 
Drucker, both the military and healthcare industries 
require people who know how to “get the right things 
done.” So mastering management is necessary, but not 
sufficient, to be an excellent military healthcare leader. 
For example, military medical leadership requires 
competent management of personnel. Drucker writes, 
“Management is about human beings. Its task is to 
make people capable of joint performance, to make their 
strengths effective and their weaknesses irrelevant.”51 
Other important management skills address time management, organization, and optimal use of resources 
(including people, materials, and finances). Zaleznik52 
argued that managers and leaders are different types 
of people. Kotter53 made the case that managers and 
leaders serve different but complementary roles. More 
recently, Watkins argued that excellent managers can 
become great leaders by changing from “specialist to 
generalist,” “analyst to integrator,” “tactician to strategist,” “bricklayer to architect,” and “warrior to diplomat.”54 It seems that managers can learn to be leaders, 
but leadership competence goes beyond management.
Table 4-1 presents a comparison of management 
and leadership. Note that management focuses on 
affecting behaviors of followers, whereas leadership 
affects behaviors, cognitions, and motivations. Also 
note that management emphasizes accountability and 
productivity, whereas leadership is aspirational and 
inspirational. 
Leadership is largely a matter of influence. Influence is tied to perception, and perception is generally 
affected by emotion. 55 One of the key competencies 
that must be further developed in leaders is emotional 
intelligence. This psychological construct was identified in the mid to late 20th century as psychologists 
recognized that the traditional intelligence quotient 
(IQ), which focuses on verbal and quantitative abilities, 
was an incomplete assessment of cognitive and other 
abilities. 56–58 The concept of emotional intelligence (or 
EQ) gained attention and popularity following Goleman’s book on the subject. 59 Essentially, EQ refers to 
the ability to accurately perceive emotions in oneself 
57
Military Medical Leadership
(self-awareness), to manage one’s own emotions (selfregulation), to accurately perceive and understand 
emotions of others (empathy), and to use that understanding to optimize relationships (social skills). EQ 
has been described by models that emphasize traits 
(making it an aspect of character), abilities (making it 
an aspect of competence), and both traits and abilities. 
Certainly individuals have different levels of EQ from 
an early age, but there are various styles of EQ that can 
be learned,60 and EQ can be taught and developed. 
Therefore, EQ is categorized here as a competence, 
but overlapping with character.
Effective, inspirational, and transformative leaders 
are thought to be particularly good at creating positive emotional reactions in followers. 55 Research by the 
Hay-McBer group examined the impact of emotional 
intelligence on individual leadership behaviors and organizational performance. In their research, leaders with 
greater emotional intelligence competence (self-awareness, self-management, empathy, relationship management) were more influential than peers who lacked 
these strengths. Business units led by men and women 
with high marks in emotional intelligence financially 
outperformed units led by leaders without this competence by 20%, and nearly 90% of the leaders with greater 
emotional intelligence placed in the top third for annual 
salary bonuses based on unit performance. 61 Leadership 
styles reflecting emotional competence had a reproducible effect on organizational climate, and leaders who 
were able to manifest different styles depending on the 
individual needs of the followers were considered most 
effective as measured by business unit performance. 61
Emotional intelligence is an important feature of 
the relationship between the leader and follower. It 
has been extensively studied and has contributed to 
the understanding of the “leader-member exchange” 
school of leadership. This relational approach posits 
that “when managers and subordinates have good, 
trusting, open, and supportive relationships, they 
report more positive attitudinal and behavioral outcomes, and workplace and leadership dynamics are 
more effective.”62 This “constructionist” approach to 
leadership suggests that relationships are “the generative source of leadership,” so it is little surprise that 
ability to establish strong relationships in accordance 
with high emotional intelligence should predict leader 
effectiveness in this model. 62 (See Goleman59 and Goleman, Boyatzis, and McKee63 for detailed discussions of 
EQ, how it relates to leadership, and how to develop 
EQ.)
A related competence of leadership is the ability to 
inclusively relate to others. Inclusive leadership rests 
on a foundation of listening, demonstrating respect 
for and willingness to involve others on the part of the 
leader. This point is consistent with the observation of 
the 24th century bce Egyptian philosopher Ptah-hotep, 
who understood the importance of leader-listening: 
“Those who must listen to the pleas and cries of their 
people should do so patiently, because the people 
want attention to what they say even more than the 
accomplishing for which they came.”62 It also highlights the overlap between leader competence and 
communication.
As the foundation of a relationship, attentive, “active” listening is the place to begin honing leader competence. Listening skills affect the leader’s competence 
across a range of leader tasks: the dynamics of running 
meetings, strategic planning, mentoring, coaching, 
and leader succession planning. The information 
gathered by leaders through strong relationships with 
the group and excellent communication is used to 
make informed, thoughtful, and appropriate decisions 
relevant to the group and the members of the group. 
Leadership is characterized by strong partner 
relationships between leader and followers. “The 
role of the leaders in these processes is to provide 
environments that are inclusive, trusting and supportive to followers; the role of the followers is to be 
active partners in the leadership process.”62 Emotional 
intelligence, interpersonal management, and decisionmaking occur in a social context that is affected by the 
unit’s task, its organization, and its culture. Therefore, 
the effective leader must also be facile at leading in a 
specific organizational or situational context. 
Context
Context includes the physical, psychological, social, 
cultural, and economic environment; various situations; and stress that a leader may face. According 
TABLE 4-1
COMPARISON OF MANAGEMENT AND 
LEADERSHIP
 
Management 
Leadership
Behaviors 
X 
X
Cognitions 
 
X
Motivations 
 
X
Vision 
Follow 
Set
Emphases 
Administration 
Motivation and
 
and oversight 
inspiration
 
Efficiency 
Innovation
 
Productivity 
Creativity
58
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
to Bennis, “context always counts when it comes to 
leadership.”64 Kellerman also emphasizes the importance of considering context in optimal leadership. 51 
Context is particularly important in military medical 
leadership because of the extreme and varied situations 
where leadership is required (physically, psychologically, and socially). Military healthcare leaders must 
be able to perform in volatile, uncertain, complex, and 
ambiguous (“VUCA”) environments; in other words, 
leaders must adapt to context. 65 
With regard to leadership, context also includes 
characteristics that are unique to the group of the 
subordinates being led; the nature of the subordinates’ 
tasks; the situation in which the leader and subordinates operate; and characteristics of the organization 
where the leadership occurs. 66 Fiedler first proposed 
a model of leadership that took into account both the 
leader’s orientation (character and leader competence) 
and the situation (context, subordinates, task, organization). Orientation reflects “an internal state intrinsic 
to the leader” that is affected by subordinates and the 
task to be accomplished (situation). 67 
Watkins has studied and written about business 
units and their impact on leader context, categorizing 
different organizations as start-ups, turnarounds, or 
organizations undergoing accelerated growth, realignment, or sustained success. He contends that leaders 
who fail in new positions do so when they “rely on 
the skills and strategies that worked for them in the 
past” instead of taking the new workplace context into 
consideration when approaching the required leadership approach. 68 Research has supported Watkins’s 
assertions. 66 
The organization’s culture includes a set of repeated 
behaviors motivated by thoughts (cognitions) and feelings (motivations/emotions) that are based in collective 
belief developed over a long period. These beliefs are 
reinforced by symbols, artifacts, and rituals, and affect the individuals as they mature and grow within 
the culture. 69 The consideration of culture is relevant 
to uniformed leaders operating across different service cultures. It is critical to understand the different 
service cultures in order to avoid misunderstandings 
and misinterpretations, including chains of command, 
preferred uniforms, and appropriate ways to address 
colleagues, superiors, and subordinates.
Each of the uniformed services has a well-defined, 
discernible culture, as Builder discusses in The Masks of 
War. Builder summarizes the different services’ primary cultural foundations: Navy, independent command 
at sea; Air Force, devotion to technology; and Army, 
service to the country as a citizen-soldier. 70 These different cultures affect the way business is conducted in 
each service and the way the leaders learn to conduct 
business. This pattern of repeated behaviors can lead 
to leadership conflict when the leader attempts to operate in the context of one service culture using learned 
behaviors from another. 71 
Leadership context must take into consideration 
nuances of the era as well as the organization. Generational sociologists Strauss and Howe have articulated 
the differences between the “generations” represented 
in today’s military: baby boomers (born 1940–1960), 
generation X (born 1960–1980), and millennials (born 
1980–2000). 72 For millennials as leaders and as followers, challenges and opportunities of digital and social 
media must be considered and addressed. 73
Other individual differences, including gender, 
should be considered as an aspect of context that may 
affect leader-follower perceptions, relations, and effectiveness. In 1996, the number of women in the United 
States with bachelor’s degrees exceeded the number of 
men, and in 2010 for the first time more women than 
men earned master’s degrees. 74 Women have become 
major players in many professions, including health 
services. 75 Gender bias as well as any ethnic, racial, 
and other biases must be continually addressed for 
leaders to succeed. (For further discussion of gender 
in leadership see Ayman and Korabik76; Cheung and 
Halpern77; and Eklund, Barry, and Grunberg. 78) 
In addition to organizational culture, other cultural 
differences must be considered for effective leadership. US military medicine is practiced in every part 
of the globe, and this practice is an essential part of 
“soft power” to support national security and provide 
humanitarian service throughout the world. Therefore, 
it is imperative to recognize that leadership must 
consider every aspect of cultural context, including 
gender, age, race, ethnicity, religion, traditions, verbal 
language, body language, eye contact, and interpersonal space.
Leadership in crisis situations (eg, life-threatening, 
resource-limited, time-urgent) presents a unique set 
of contextual challenges, requiring different considerations that may be uniquely important to military 
medical leaders. “In-extremis leadership,” according to 
Kolditz, requires focus on the external environment to 
make decisions about appropriate actions. Moreover, 
leaders must share the same risks as subordinates, 
and must be sufficiently competent to inspire trust, 
loyalty, hope, and confidence in subordinates. Kolditz 
cites examples of combat leadership to illustrate how 
to adjust to extreme conditions and context. 29 
Leaders respond to context in multiple ways. They 
learn to have situational awareness, change behaviors 
to suit the situation, or manage and alter the situation. This responsive adaptation has been proposed 
by Ayman and Adams as representing Sternberg’s 
59
Military Medical Leadership
model of “triarchic” intelligence: the individual’s 
“purposive adaptation to, selection of and shaping of 
the real-world environment relevant to one’s life and 
abilities.”66
Additionally, leaders must consider how perceptions, challenges, and behaviors are altered in the 
context of stress. A leader’s dominant responses become more marked or prominent under stress. If the 
dominant response is to do something correctly, then 
performance improves. But if the dominant response 
is to do something incorrectly, performance deteriorates. 79,80 Decision-making often relies on automatic 
or dominant responses in the context of stress. In addition, people tend to yield more readily to authority 
when under stress. 28 Therefore, the leader—whether 
right or wrong—can become more influential in stressful situations. 
Research has indicated that stress is related to 
performance and hedonics by an inverse U-shaped 
function, so that performance and mood are optimal 
at moderate stress, but poorer at minimal or extreme 
stress. 81 When leadership occurs under stress (as it 
often does in military medical practice, whether in 
the emergency department, operating theater, or 
field, because of harsh environmental conditions or 
combat), leader authority is particularly influential 
and dominant responses (good or bad) of leaders and 
followers emerge.
Military medicine occurs in broad and varied contexts. For teams and groups to function effectively in 
all contexts, clear and accurate transmission of information is critical. Communication, therefore, is the 
fourth critical domain of leadership (see Chapter 11, 
Military Communication, for a broader discussion of 
communication relevant to military medicine).
Communication
Effective communication, a critical element in most 
leadership models, takes into consideration the leader’s narrative, vision for the group or organization, and 
style of communication. Rhetoric is the communication 
of this narrative in person, electronically, in video, or 
in writing. It is important to recognize that communication involves sending and receiving, verbally (oral 
and written words) and nonverbally (including tone 
of voice, intonation, volume, body language, facial 
expressions, and gestures). “Reading” and “receiving” 
information from followers’ faces, body language, and 
moods are as important as listening to their verbal 
input. “Sending” information nonverbally through 
facial expression, gesture, and touch are as important as clearly expressed words. Tone of voice, pitch, 
rhythm, timbre, and volume also are important in oral 
communication. All forms of written messages (eg, 
memos, directives, policy statements, emails, tweets, 
instant messaging) must be carefully constructed for 
clarity. They should convey rational and well-reasoned 
decision-making, consideration of input, and respect 
for others. Verbal and nonverbal communication must 
be in synchrony to be effective and trustworthy.
Communication requires planning and practice. It 
also involves awareness of applicable principles and 
techniques. It is important for the communicator to be 
credible, trustworthy, and knowledgeable about the 
information conveyed. Communications that consider 
primacy (information that is presented first), recency 
(information that is presented last), repetition, clarity, 
and relevance of information to the audience are most 
effective. Point-counterpoint (ie, addressing opposing 
opinions), memorable imagery and anecdotes, and 
consistency of nonverbal expression and verbal content 
all add to persuasive communication. 82–85 
Influential leaders communicate in appropriate, emotionally modulated ways, packaging their 
messages so that they are easily understood, able to 
captivate audiences, and adjusted to the emotional 
needs of followers (eg, when to fire them up, when 
to calm them down; when to be empathetic and 
when to be authoritarian). Effective leaders are good 
storytellers. They know how to use voice and body 
gestures and are masters of rhetoric. In a discussion 
of charismatic leadership, Antonakis identified Aristotle’s work Rhetoric as a summary of the importance 
of communication to leadership. 47 It also is apparent 
that Aristotle appreciated the importance of character, 
competence, and context to communication. With 
regard to character:
The first kind (of persuasion) depends on the personal character of the speaker . . . Persuasion is achieved 
by the speaker’s personal character when the speech 
is so spoken as to make us think him credible. We 
believe good men more fully and more readily than 
others: this is true generally whatever the question is, 
and absolutely true where exact certainty is impossible and opinions are divided. 
. . .
It is not true, as some writers assume in their treatises on rhetoric, that the personal goodness revealed 
by the speaker contributes nothing to his power of 
persuasion; on the contrary, his character may almost 
be called the most effective means of persuasion he 
possesses. 86 
Aristotle’s opinions suggest cognizance of emotional intelligence by considering the listeners’ feelings:
60
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Persuasion may come through the hearers, when the 
speech stirs their emotions. Our judgments when we 
are pleased and friendly are not the same as when we 
are pained and hostile. 86 
Aristotle underscores the importance of context 
by addressing the communication within the “case 
in question”:
Persuasion is effected through the speech itself when 
we have proved a truth or an apparent truth by 
means of the persuasive arguments suitable to the 
case in question. 86 
Effective communication is a hallmark of successful leadership. The message is a crucial aspect of the leader’s rhetoric. In military medicine, 
messages are compelling and essential. Leaders 
advise about life and death and how to sustain 
health and avoid injury and illness; recover from 
injury and illness; and prepare for and deal with 
death. These communications must be clear, unambiguous, sensitive, compassionate, and respectful.
Retired Air Force General Johnnie Jumper tells the 
story of walking through a crowd of fresh recruits recently graduated from basic training. He asked a young 
graduate how she felt. “Sir,” she told him, “for the first 
time in my life, I feel as though I am a part of something 
bigger than myself.” Leaders must learn to tell the story 
in ways that will be understood and embraced, to tell 
what Sinek would call a story about “why.”87 Pearce 
emphasizes that leaders must understand and express 
their emotions with their message to truly communicate 
authentically and to optimize influence. 30
Frankl believed that “man’s search for meaning 
is the primary motivation of his life.” He proposed 
that “at any moment, man must decide, for better or 
worse, what will be the monument of his existence.”88 
Most military medical leaders share the same sense of 
purpose in caring for warriors and their families and 
training the next generations of providers. This sense 
of purpose can be conveyed in ways to inspire and 
strengthen others.
Military service provides meaning and significance 
for service members and the healthcare professionals 
who care for them. Veterans often miss the camaraderie after they leave the military. The basis of this 
camaraderie is unity around a single purpose. Service 
members are drawn to this message of unity of purpose, and they miss it when it is gone.
Sonnenfeld and Ward, writing about personal 
leadership in crises, observed that “the most common theme in the research on resilience is the necessity of a core sense of meaning in the person’s 
life.”89 The story that sustains service members, 
their families, and the professionals who care for 
them through the challenges of severe illnesses 
and injuries, deployments and separation, and the 
pressures of practice and living in a “glass bowl” 
is the narrative of being part of something bigger 
than themselves. The military medical leader’s understanding of that narrative, genuine belief in it, 
and ability to communicate this sense of meaning 
verbally and nonverbally may be the single most 
important contribution to the group and to the 
organization. 
PITO
The four domains (or four Cs) of leadership should 
be considered, developed, and evaluated (by each 
leader and by others) across the four psychological, 
social psychological, and sociological levels—personal, 
interpersonal, team, and organizational—to develop 
outstanding leadership. 13,90 Combination of the FourCe 
domains with the PITO levels creates a powerful 
TABLE 4-2 
SAMPLE ELEMENTS OF FOURCE-PITO FRAMEWORK
 
Character (Ch) 
Competence (Cp) 
Context (Cx) 
Communication (Cm)
Personal 
Identify core values 
Develop self-awareness 
Understand service 
Communicate effectively
 
 
 
cultures
Interpersonal 
Share core values 
Enhance emotional 
Work in dyads 
Communicate difficult
 
 
intelligence 
 
information
Team 
Build team values 
Understand group 
Work in small groups 
Communicate with team
 
 
dynamics 
 
under stress
Organizational 
Inspire core values in 
Learn strategic vision 
Understand various 
Communicate to large
 
large groups 
 
cultures 
groups
61
Military Medical Leadership
Figure 4-1. FourCe-PITO framework.
Figure 4-2. Expanded FourCe-PITO framework.
Figure 4-3. Expanded FourCe-PITO framework with examples of lessons.
Figure 4-4. Abbreviated FourCe-PITO framework.
framework to guide leadership education and development as well as self-evaluation and evaluation by 
others, including peers, subordinates, and supervisors. 
Figure 4-1 presents the FourCe-PITO framework 
now used by the Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences Leadership Education and Development Program to identify elements of leadership training, needs for research and scholarship, and ways to 
assess military leadership. Figure 4-2 presents a more 
detailed version of this framework, listing examples 
of key elements of each of the four Cs. Figure 4-3 and 
Table 4-2 present more granular versions of this framework with examples of leadership goals for each of 
the four Cs at each of the four PITO levels. Figure 4-4 
presents an abbreviated version of the FourCe-PITO 
framework. 
62
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
HOW TO USE THE FOURCE-PITO FRAMEWORK
The FourCe-PITO leadership framework offered 
in this chapter can be used to develop and evaluate 
oneself and others as leaders. A leader can reflect upon 
and list strengths and gaps in each of the 16 cells of 
the FourCe-PITO matrix. In addition, a leader can ask 
others (including peers, subordinates, and supervisors) 
to do the same exercise for a full or “360°” assessment. 
Identified gaps, places to improve, and ways to refine 
elements of the model can be addressed with self-study 
and reflective writing, interpersonal discussions with 
peers and coaches, team-building exercises, and other 
leadership development experiences that are available 
via in-person workshops as well as online courses 
and exercises. Evaluation of leadership performance 
using the FourCe-PITO framework can also be done 
in hospital, clinic, field, and other settings. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Caesar J. The Gallic Wars. 1st ed. New York: Harper & Brothers; 1869.
 
2. Day DV. Leadership development: A review in context. Leadership Q. 2001;11(4):581–613.
 
3. Department of the Army. Leader Development. Washington, DC: DA; 2012. Army Doctrine and Training Publication 
6-22.
 
4. Department of the Navy. Naval Command and Control. Washington, DC: Office of the Chief of Naval Operations; 1995. 
Naval Doctrine Publication 6.
 
5. Department of the Air Force. Leadership and Force Development. Washington, DC: USAF; 2011. AFDD 1-1.
 
6. McKiernan D. The 4 C’s (plus 1) of leadership—it’s people skills that count! Thayer Leader Development Group. http://
www.thayerleaderdevelopment.com/blog/2014/the-4-cs-plus-1-of-leadership-its-people-skills-that-count. Published 
January 1, 2017. Accessed June 16, 2017.
Acknowledgments
We especially thank Erin S. Barry for her valuable assistance preparing this chapter. We also thank Shelley McKechnie 
Cryan, Melissa Givens, Shawn Kane, Hannah Kleber, Matthew Moosey, Anita Novarro, Dale Smith, Eric Schoomaker, 
and Angela M. Yarnell for their critiques and suggestions.
SUMMARY
Effective military medical leadership is important 
for the successful, safe, and efficient delivery of healthcare, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation services. 
Leadership is the enhancement of behaviors (actions), 
cognitions (thoughts and beliefs), and motivations (reasons 
for actions and thoughts) to achieve goals that benefit individuals and groups. 
The four Cs of leadership are character, competence, context, and communication. Character 
includes confidence, humility, responsibility, integrity, trustworthiness, optimism, empathy, and 
service values (for military medical leadership). 
Competence includes transcendent leadership 
knowledge and skills and sufficient expertise determined by the role and specialty. Context includes 
physical, psychological, social, cultural, and economic environments; various situations; and stress. 
Communication refers to sending and receiving 
information, verbally and nonverbally. The psychological, social psychological, and sociological 
levels of interaction relevant to leadership are personal (the individual), interpersonal (dyads), team 
(small teams), and organizational (large groups). 
The FourCe-PITO framework provides a guide for 
military medical leadership education development 
and evaluation. 
63
Military Medical Leadership
 
7. Rizzo JP. Johnson develops self-aware business leaders through a continuous, reinforcing cycle of instruction, experience, and review. Cornell Enterprise Online. http://www2.johnson.cornell.edu/alumni/enterprise/fall2012/index.cfm
?action=department&department_id=13. Published fall 2012. Accessed June 8, 2015.
 
8. Azure Consulting. Rethinking leadership realities: The dynamics of the four Cs. http://www.amazureconsulting.com/
wp-content/uploads/2016/07/RethinkingLeadershipRealities.pdf. Accessed June 8, 2015.
 
9. Gray B. The 4 C’s of leadership. Bryan Gray Ministries. http://bryangrayministries.com/4-cs-of-leadership/. Accessed 
June 8, 2015.
 10. Walter E. 4 Cs of enlightened leadership. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/ekaterinawalter/2014/04/22/4-cs-ofenlightened-leadership/#7749f2a13456. Published April 22, 2014. Accessed January 3, 2018.
 11. Columbia College. The 4Cs of leadership development. http://www.columbiasc.edu/about/about-columbia-college/
the-4cs-of-leadership-development. Accessed June 8, 2015.
 12. Winston BE. The four Cs of Christian leadership. Regent University, Inner Resources for Leaders. https://www.regent.
edu/acad/global/publications/innerresources/vol2iss2/winston.pdf. Accessed June 8, 2015.
 13. Jackson RJ, Lindsay DR, Coyne S. Leadership & character at the United States Air Force Academy. J Character Leadership Integration. 2010;1(2):37–49.
 14. Price PA. Genesis and Evolution of the United States Air Force Academy’s Officer Development System [research report]. 
Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University; 2004.
 15. US Air Force Academy website. http://www.usafa.af.mil/. Accessed June 16, 2017.
 16. Corso RA. Confidence in Congress stays at lowest point in almost fifty years: Confidence in the military and small 
business still at the top. The Harris Poll. May 21, 2012.
 17. Pollack H. Doctors, military officers, firefighters and scientists seen as among America’s most prestigious occupations. 
The Harris Poll. September 10, 2014.
 18. Confidence in institutions. The Gallup Poll. June 8, 2014.
 19. Kirby SN, Marsh JA, McCombs JS, Thie HJ, Xia N, Sollinger JM. Developing Custodians of Care: Military Medical Leadership. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2011.
 20. Accountable care organizations (ACOs): general information. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. http://
innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/aco/. Published December 2010. Accessed September 29, 2014.
 21. Cuny FC. Use of the military in humanitarian relief. Address delivered at: Niinsalo, Finland, military academy; November 1989. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/cuny/laptop/humanrelief.html. Accessed September 
5, 2014.
 22. Janson DJ. Military Medical Care: Questions and Answers. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service; 2013.
 23. Merlis M. The Future of Health Care for Military Personnel and Veterans. Washington, DC: AcademyHealth; 2012.
 24. Keith T. Health care costs new threat to U.S. military [transcript]. Morning Edition. National Public Radio. http://
www.npr.org/2011/06/07/137009416/u-s-military-has-new-threat-health-care-costs. Published June 7, 2011. Accessed 
September 29, 2014.
 25. Gawande A. Cowboys and pit crews: Address to the graduating Harvard Medical School class. New Yorker. https://
www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/cowboys-and-pit-crews. Published May 26, 2011. Accessed January 3, 2018.
64
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 26. Ashton A. One in five Army hospital leaders suspended in two years: What’s behind the discipline? News Tribune. 
http://www.thenewstribune.com/news/local/military/article25882534.html. Published September 20, 2014. Accessed 
June 19, 2017.
 27. Zander AF, Cartwright D. Group Dynamics: Research and Theory. New York, NY: Harper & Row; 1968.
 28. Heifetz RA. Leadership Without Easy Answers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, Belknap Press; 2000.
 29. Kolditz T. In Extremis Leadership: Leading as if Your Life Depended on It. New York, NY: Jossey-Bass; 2007.
 30. Pearce T. Leading Out Loud: A Guide for Engaging Others in Creating the Future. 3rd ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 2013.
 31. Day DV, Antonakis J. Leadership: Past, present, and future. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 5.
 32. Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012.
 33. Northouse PG. Leadership: Theory and Practice. 6th ed. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications; 2013.
 34. Van Vugt M. The nature in leadership: Evolutionary, biological and social neuroscience perspectives. In: Day DV, 
Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 158–159.
 35. Shay J. Achilles and Odysseus today: What Homer can tell us about military leadership. Hellenic Communication 
Service LLC website. http://www.helleniccomserve.com/shayachillesnodysseus.html. Published August 28, 2006. Accessed September 30, 2014.
 36. Joshua 1:9.
 37. Beowolf. Boston, MA: DC Health; 1815.
 38. Carlyle R. On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History. London, United Kingdom: Jason Fraser; 1841.
 39. Arvey RD, Rotundo M, Johnson W, Zhang Z, McGue M. The determinants of leadership role occupancy: genetic and 
personality factors. Leadership Q. 2006;17(1):1–20.
 40. Arvey RD, Zhang Z, Avolio BJ, Krueger RF. Developmental and genetic determinants of leadership role occupancy 
among women. J Appl Psychol. 2007;92(3):693.
 41. Judge TA, Long DM. Individual differences in leadership. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. 
Thousand Oaks, CA Sage Publications 2012:190.
 42. Day DV. The nature of leadership development. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 108–140.
 43. Lewin K, Lippitt R. An experimental approach to the study of autocracy and democracy: A preliminary note. Sociometry. 1938;1(3/4):292–300.
 44. Weber M. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York, NY: Free Press; 1947.
 45. Bass BM. Leadership and Performance Beyond Expectations. New York, NY: Free Press; 1985.
 46. Downton JV. Rebel Leadership: Commitment and Charisma in the Revolutionary Process. New York, NY: Free Press; 1973.
 47. Antonakis J. Transformational and charismatic leadership. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 256–288.
 48. Collins J. Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap . . . and Others Don’t. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publications; 2001.
65
Military Medical Leadership
 49. Asch SE. Effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of judgments: In Guetzkow H, ed. Groups, 
Leadership, and Men. Oxford, England: Carnegie Press; 1951: 177–190.
 50. Festinger L. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Vol 2. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press; 1962.
 51. Drucker P. The Essential Drucker: The Best of Sixty Years of Peter Drucker’s Ideas on Management. New York, NY: Harper 
Business; 2001.
 52. Zaleznik A. Managers and leaders: are they different? Harvard Business Rev. https://hbr.org/2004/01/managers-andleaders-are-they-different. Published January 2004. Accessed August 28, 2015.
 53. Kotter J. What leaders really do. Harvard Business Rev. https://hbr.org/2001/12/what-leaders-really-do?autocomplete=true. 
Published December 2001. Accessed January 3, 2018. 
 54. Watkins M. How managers become leaders. Harvard Business Rev. https://hbr.org/2012/06/how-managers-becomeleaders. Published June 2012. Accessed January 3, 2018.
 55. Lord RG, Dinh JE. Aggregation processes and levels of analyses as organizing structures. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, 
eds. The Nature of Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 29–65. 
 56. Payne WL. A Study of Emotion: Developing Emotional Intelligence; Self-Integration; Relating to Fear, Pain and Desire (Theory, 
Structure of Reality, Problem-Solving, Contraction/Expansion, Tuning In/Coming Out/Letting Go). Brattleboro, VT: Union 
for Experimenting Colleges and Universities; 1985.
 57. Greenspan SI. Emotional intelligence. In: Field K, Cohler BJ, Wool G, eds. Learning and Education: Psychoanalytic Perspectives. Madison, CT: International Universities Press; 1989: 209–243. Emotions and Behavior Monographs vol 6.
 58. Salovey P, Mayer J. Emotional intelligence. Imagin Cogn Pers. 1989;9(3):185–211.
 59. Goleman D. Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ. New York, NY: Bantam Dell; 1995.
 60. Warner J. Emotional Intelligence Style Profile. Amherst, MA; Human Resource Development Press; 2001.
 61. Goleman D. Leadership that gets results. Harvard Business Rev. https://hbr.org/2000/03/leadership-that-gets-results. 
Published March-April 2000. Accessed January 3, 2018.
 62. Uhl-Bien M, Maslyn J, Ospona S. The nature of relational leadership. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 289–330.
 63. Goleman D, Boyatzis RE, McKee A. Primal Leadership: Realizing the Power of Emotional Intelligence. Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press; 2002.
 64. Bennis W. The crucibles of authentic leadership. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 543–556.
 65. Berinato S. A framework for understanding VUCA. Harvard Business Rev. https://hbr.org/2014/09/a-framework-forunderstanding-vuca. Published September 5, 2014. Accessed June 19, 2017.
 66. Ayman R, Adams S. Contingencies, context, situation, and leadership. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of 
Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012: 218–255. 
 67. Fiedler FE. A contingency model of leadership effectiveness. Adv Exp Soc Psychol. 1964;1:149–190.
 68. Watkins M. Picking the right transition strategy. Harvard Business Rev. https://hbr.org/2009/01/picking-the-righttransition-strategy. Published January 2009. Accessed January 3, 2018.
 69. Callahan C. Stowaway soldier: Being camouflage in a khaki world. Naval War Coll J. 2013;66:139–145.
66
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 70. Builder CH. The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press; 1989. RAND Corporation research study.
 71. Callahan C. Keeping the name: Walter Reed Bethesda: Lessons from a complex medical merger. In press. 
 72. Howe N, Strauss W. Generations: The History of America’s Huture, 1584 to 2069. New York, NY: HarperCollins; 1992.
 73. Fritzson A, Howell LW, Zakheim DS. Military of milennials. Strategy+Business. https://www.strategy-business.com/
article/07401?pg=0. Published November 28, 2007. Accessed January 3, 2018. 
 74. Hendel J. A US gender milestone: More women have advanced degrees than men. Atlantic. 2011, https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2011/04/a-us-gender-milestone-more-women-have-advanced-degrees-than-men/237913/. 
Published April 26, 2011. Accessed January 3, 2018.
 75. Carli L, Eagly A. Leadership and gender. In: Day DV, Antonakis J, eds. The Nature of Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications; 2012: 437–476.
 76. Ayman R, Korabik K. Leadership: Why gender and culture matter. Am Psychol. 2010;65(3):157–170.
 77. Cheung FM, Halpern DF. Women at the top: powerful leaders define success as work + family in a culture of gender. 
Am Psychol. 2010;65(3):182–193.
 78. Eklund KE, Barry ES, Grunberg NE. Gender and leadership. In: Alvinius A, ed. Gender Differences. Rijeka, Croatia: 
Intech Open Science; 2017: 129–150.
 79. Zajonc RB. Social facilitation. Science. 1965;149(3681):269–274.
 80. Zajonc RB, Sales SM. Social facilitation of dominant and subordinate responses. J Exp Soc Psychol. 1966;2(2):160–168.
 81. Yerkes RM, Dodson JD. The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. J Comp Neurol Psychol. 
1908;18(5):459–482.
 82. Hovland CI, Weiss W. The influence of source credibility on communication effectiveness. Public Opinion Q. 
1951;15(4):635–650.
 83. Imada AS, Hakel MD. Influence of nonverbal communication and rater proximity on impressions and decisions in 
simulated employment interviews. J Appl Psychol. 1977;62(3):295.
 84. Miller N, Campbell DT. Recency and primacy in persuasion as a function of the timing of speeches and measurements. 
J Abnorm Psychol. 1959;59(1):1–9.
 85. Weaver K, Garcia SM, Schwarz N, Miller DT. Inferring the popularity of an opinion from its familiarity: a repetitive 
voice can sound like a chorus. J Pers Soc Psychol. 2007;92(5):821–833.
 86. Aristotle. Rhetoric. http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/rhetoric. 1.i.html. Accessed September 29, 2014.
 87. Sinek S. Start With Why. How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action. New York, NY: Portfolio; 2009.
 88. Frankl V. A Man’s Search for Meaning. Cutchogue, NY: Buccaneer Books, Inc; 1959.
 89. Sonnenfeld J, Ward A. Firing Back: How Great Leaders Rebound After Career Disasters. Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press; 2006.
 90. Price PA. Genesis and Evolution of the United States Air Force Academy’s Officer Development System [research paper]. 
Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: 2004. http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a428315.pdf. Accessed January 3, 2018.
