249
Medical Logistics
Chapter 17
MEDICAL LOGISTICS
DAVID SLONIKER* and JAMES F. SCHWARTZ†
INTRODUCTION
INTEGRATED MEDICAL LOGISTICS MANAGEMENT
ORGANIZATIONAL ROLES AND MISSIONS
Strategic Role
Service Agencies
Operational Roles
Tactical Roles
Blood Management
Medical Maintenance
Optical Fabrication
Patient Movement Items
MEDICAL LOGISTICS LESSONS LEARNED
Tips for the Provider
Checklist and Planning Considerations
RESOURCES
SUMMARY 
*Colonel, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Commander, 6th Medical Logistics Management Center, Fort Detrick, Maryland
†Lieutenant Colonel (Retired), Medical Service Corps, US Army; Assistant Professor and Chief of Staff, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, 
F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
250
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
 Few elements of health service support (HSS) are 
as routinely underappreciated by the medical caregiver as is medical logistics (“MEDLOG”). In a world 
in which Internet-enabled purchasing of everything 
from books to clothing to groceries and toiletries has 
made face-to-face encounters with a salesperson nearly 
obsolete, where delivery trucks make round-the-clock 
home deliveries, and even drones are being explored 
for supplying just-in-time commercial products, 
the many processes and network of relationships in 
logistics have become invisible to the customer. In a 
tribute to the professional success of medical logisticians, these processes are often even less apparent in 
a clinic or hospital. Drugs are ordered electronically 
and either unit-dosed to a ward or dispensed promptly 
in a pharmacy. The surgeon—swaddled in disposable 
sterile gowns and mask and sheathed in latex gloves—
asks for a specific suture, instrument, or device and is 
almost instantly provided the right tool. 
Yet no aspect of medical support for global military operations is more complex or demanding of 
agility, adaptive processes, specificity, and creativity 
than MEDLOG. In addition, effective and efficient 
MEDLOG in the dynamic field of healthcare must be 
concerned with the entire supply chain, from manufacturer to end-user, and from initial deployment of a 
device or piece of equipment, through obsolescence, 
disposal, and replacement with a more current or 
updated version. Joint Publication 4. 02 describes MEDLOG as an integral part of the Military Health System 
that provides capabilities to organize and provide lifecycle management of the specialty medical products 
and services required to operate an integrated health 
system anywhere in the world. 1 
MEDLOG support must be responsive to differences in professional training and specialty requirements. Proactive planning is required to predict 
materiel requirements and logistics support based on 
mission requirements and the operational environment. Close rapport, continuous communication, 
and mutual respect and understanding between the 
medical logistician and the healthcare provider are 
all essential for maintaining the health of military personnel, ensuring the lifesaving ability of the medical 
force, and conserving the fighting force. This chapter 
provides new medical officers and other healthcare 
providers with a primer on the Department of Defense 
(DoD) MEDLOG functional area, on the operational, 
strategic, and tactical levels. This is by no means a 
doctrinal document; rather, it is a guide for understanding the roles of medical logisticians in garrison 
and for developing the MEDLOG support plan in an 
operational environment. The primary tasks of the 
MEDLOG function is to provide:
 
• medical materiel management,
 
• medical equipment maintenance and repair,
 
• optical fabrication, 
 
• blood distribution management,
 
• centralized management of patient movement 
items,
 
• health facilities planning and management, 
and
 
• medical contracting.
INTEGRATED MEDICAL LOGISTICS MANAGEMENT
The differences among US Army, Navy, Air Force, 
and Marine Corps medical operations are often contextually specific. MEDLOG support is therefore normally a USC Title 10 service responsibility. However, 
in joint operations, a single integrated medical logistics 
manager (SIMLM) and a theater lead agent for medical 
materiel (TLAMM) are designated. The SIMLM’s mission, assigned to a service component command or joint 
task force, is to provide MEDLOG support of the joint 
force and government or multinational partners. The 
mission assignment is specific and depends on the supported force, complexity of distribution processes, and 
duration of need. The SIMLM promotes supply chain 
efficiency and minimizes the theater MEDLOG force. 
TLAMMs are units or organizations designated by 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in coordination with the geographic combatant commands and 
secretaries of the military departments, to serve as 
the major theater medical distribution point. These 
units provide the face to the customer for MEDLOG 
and supply chain management. TLAMMs manage 
demand-supported medical materiel inventories to 
support HSS operations and maintain relations with 
theater customers, national-level suppliers, and theater distribution management activities. TLAMMs 
are geographically based and assist the geographical 
combatant commander, SIMLM, and Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) in MEDLOG planning, provide 
direct medical materiel support to theater medical 
forces, and ensure operational and tactical units are 
integrated into the end-to-end medical supply chain. 
They are resourced through their parent service, operate through the command and control structure of their 
parent organization, and provide support under the 
authority of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
designation and DoD policy. 
251
Medical Logistics
Army TLAMMs execute supply operations using 
DLA’s Defense Working Capital Fund, while the Air 
Force TLAMMs use the Air Force Working Capital 
Fund. Core MEDLOG functions required to support 
medical operations, as defined in Joint Publication 4-02, 
include medical supply; medical equipment maintenance and repair; assembly and fielding of medical 
assemblages; and management of vaccines, investigational drugs, special equipment, and any other materiel 
subject to special interest or control by the joint force 
surgeon. 1 The joint force surgeon’s office coordinates 
HSS and force health protection capabilities for the 
joint force, including MEDLOG. Synchronization of 
HSS among the joint force and the SIMLM leads to 
integrated MEDLOG support across the geographic 
combatant command.
ORGANIZATIONAL ROLES AND MISSIONS
For an enterprise of the magnitude required to provide and maintain medical supplies and equipment 
for military operations on a global scale to be successful, it must have an orderly approach and a coherent 
structure from the highest level of DoD acquisition to 
the smallest unit or the sole provider at the point of 
use anywhere in the world. Imagine a combination 
drug store, appliance store, and repair garage serving a small community coupled to an ever-changing 
research and development and manufacturing consortium capable of staying abreast of the community’s 
demands for the most effective, safest, and targeted 
needs. Military MEDLOG performs these functions on 
a continuous basis with few interruptions or miscues.
Strategic Role 
Like any large health maintenance and healthcare 
organization, the DoD is an enormous consumer of 
medical supplies, pharmaceuticals, and equipment. At 
the highest organizational level, the demands of the 
individual services can be unified into large bulk purchases, resulting in cost advantages, reduced variation 
in quality and form, and simplified warehousing and 
distribution. DoD designated the DLA director as the 
single representative for all of the services—the DoD 
executive agent for medical materiel (known in DoD 
parlance as Class VIII)—in 2005. 2 (DLA also serves as 
the DoD executive agent for several classes of supply 
besides medical, including food [Class I], uniforms 
[Class II], and fuel [Class III].) DLA in turn delegated 
executive responsibility to the commander of DLATroop Support (DLA-TS), located in Philadelphia. 
DLA-TS provides the overarching contracts for the 
DoD worldwide. Major multiyear contracts are negotiated with the major suppliers of materiel (“prime 
vendors”) at great savings for the DoD through economies of scale. DLA-TS procures medical materiel and 
equipment for the DoD and “sells” them to the military 
service end-users. DLA-TS establishes contractual 
arrangements for the acquisition and distribution of 
surge and sustainment materiel in support of the services’ contingency shortfalls. DLA-TS provides the operational infrastructure enabling high-priority medical 
materiel to be shipped through a single consolidation 
hub directly into theater. As a result, medical customers in the Army Central Command (CENTCOM) and 
European Command (EUCOM) have in-transit visibility, which allows limited transportation resources 
to be used more efficiently, thereby improving the 
effectiveness of the DoD MEDLOG supply chain.
Service Agencies
As mentioned above, each of the medical services 
maintains a service-specific MEDLOG capability to 
meet the unique demands of their respective end-users. But it should be noted that each of three principal 
service MEDLOG coordinating centers are collocated 
at the Defense Medical Logistics Center facility located 
at Fort Detrick, Maryland—in many regards, the center 
of MEDLOG for the DoD.
The US Army Medical Materiel Agency (USAMMA), a subordinate command of the Army Medical 
Research and Materiel Command, acts as the Army 
surgeon general’s focal point for strategic MEDLOG 
programs and initiatives. USAMMA’s mission is to 
develop, acquire, provide, and sustain world-class 
solutions and capabilities to enable medical readiness globally. Accordingly, the USAMMA’s principal skills and technologies focus on the medical 
logistician’s role in lifecycle management, sustaining 
and modernizing the medical force (active, Guard, 
and reserve), supporting exercises and contingency 
operations, and promoting MEDLOG information 
and knowledge. 
The Navy Medical Logistics Command (NMLC) is 
focused on operational/expeditionary MEDLOG support and military treatment facility logistics support, 
acquisition, and analytics. It also offers commercial law 
advisors to Navy medicine. NMLC possesses a unique 
capability by centrally owning the technical, legal, 
and contracting execution arms for Navy medicine. In 
addition to the Fort Detrick location, NMLC operates 
a detachment in Germany; the Naval Expeditionary 
Support Command in Williamsburg, Virginia; and the 
Naval Ophthalmic Support and Training Activity in 
Yorktown, Virginia. 
252
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
The Air Force Medical Logistics Operations Center 
(AFMLOC) provides equipment, materiel, services, 
and information to the Air Force medical mission and 
MEDLOG activities at the unit level. AFMLOC is the 
center for Air Force medical supply chain management; it publishes and monitors guidance on supply 
chain management for Air Force major commands and 
deployed medical units. Deployed Air Force units use 
expeditionary MEDLOG and a “reach back” system of 
support for sustainment of early-deployed platforms 
until a TLAMM becomes available. 
Operational Roles
The link between commercial vendors, military 
acquisition, and distribution occurs at key MEDLOG 
oversight and distribution centers. These centers are 
distributed to optimally serve the geographic combatant commands while exploiting economies of scale 
whenever possible. In addition, modifications of 
MEDLOG support of US and coalition partners can be 
adapted for specific needs to build host nation capacity. 3–6 The major centers are listed below.
The 6th Medical Logistics Management Center 
(6th MLMC) deploys to provide centralized medical 
materiel lifecycle management to designated forces to 
sustain worldwide combatant command contingency 
operations and defense support of civil authorities. 
The 6th MLMC is a direct reporting unit to US Army 
Forces Command under the administrative control 
and training readiness authority of the Army Medical 
Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC). (As 
of October 1, 2018, USAMRMC is a subordinate command of the US Army Materiel Command. 7 The impact 
of this reorganization on the strategic and operational 
dimensions of MEDLOG is unclear at the time of this 
textbook’s publication.)
The US Army Medical Materiel Center–Europe 
(USAMMC-E), also a subordinate command of the 
Medical Research and Materiel Command, is the 
TLAMM for EUCOM, US Africa Command (AFRICOM), and State Department activities. USAMMC-E 
is located in Pirmasens, Germany, near Landstuhl 
Regional Medical Center and the major airhead at 
Ramstein Air Force Base. The core functions of USAMMC-E are lifecycle management and distribution 
of Class VIII materiel; clinical engineering support; 
clinical advice and consultation; optical fabrication; 
and assembly, reconstitution, and disassembly of 
medical sets, kits, and outfits. USAMMC-E also trains 
logisticians on supply chain management, including 
military occupational specialty proficiency training for 
enlisted MEDLOG specialists, overseas deployment 
training for Guard and reserve troops, and predeployment training to deploying units.
The US Army Medical Materiel Center–Korea 
(USAMMC-K), located in Camp Carroll, South Korea, 
serves at the TLAMM for US Forces Korea and organizations located in the Korean theater. USAMMC-K 
provides unit-level medical maintenance to outlying 
health, dental, and veterinary clinics and operational 
units across the Korean peninsula. 
Other centers are listed below.
 
• The US Army Medical Materiel Center–
Southwest Asia (Provisional) serves as the 
TLAMM for CENTCOM. Its mission is to 
provide, project, and sustain MEDLOG support across the full spectrum of operations 
throughout the CENTCOM area of responsibility.
 
• The Air Force Medical Operations Agency, 
located in San Antonio, Texas, is the TLAMM 
for US Southern Command.
 
• The 18th Medical Group, located on Kadena 
Air Base, Japan, is the TLAMM for US forces 
and organizations operating inside the Pacific 
Command (PACOM) area of responsibility, 
excluding the Korean theater.
Tactical Roles 
Different types of units perform MEDLOG at the 
tactical level for the services. An Army medical logistics company (MLC) is normally subordinated to a 
multifunctional medical battalion (MMB). If an MMB 
is not available, the MLC is aligned to a combat support hospital. The MLC mission is to provide direct 
support for medical supplies, single and multi-vision 
optical lens fabrication and repair, and medical equipment maintenance to brigade- and corps-level medical 
units or to a maximum force of 22,000 soldiers. It can 
receive and process 11. 1 short tons and store up to 51 
short tons of Class VIII supplies and equipment, and is 
capable of deploying forward distribution and contact 
repair teams.
Unlike the Army MLC, the Marine Corps MLC 
is organized as a part of a Marine supply battalion, 
combat logistics regiment, and Marine logistics group. 
The Marine Corps MLC is not a part of the Marine 
medical battalion; like the Army MLC, it has materiel 
management, distribution management, and biomedical maintenance capabilities within the company. 
In the Air Force, a medical logistics flight is a part 
of a medical support squadron in a medical group. Air 
Force MEDLOG support is not designed to provide 
area support to other services without augmentation.
An Army brigade medical supply office (BMSO) is 
located in a medical company with a brigade support 
battalion. The BMSO mission is to provide direct sup253
Medical Logistics
port for Class VIII supplies and medical equipment 
maintenance to the brigade, it has limited capacity to 
provide area support in an operational environment. 
Another MEDLOG tactical unit is the Army blood 
support detachment, described below. 
Blood Management
The Armed Forces Blood Program Office is responsible for managing the DoD’s blood supply, also known 
as Class VIII (B). At the strategic level, the geographic 
combatant command surgeon creates a joint blood program office to jointly manage the blood program and 
an area joint blood program office (AJBPO) in support 
of the theater directly. In theater, the Air Force expeditionary blood transshipment center (EBTC) provides 
initial reception processing from one of the two armed 
services whole blood processing laboratories based in 
the continental United States: West for PACOM and 
East for EUCOM, CENTCOM, and AFRICOM. Upon 
direction and coordination from the AJBPO, the EBTC 
ships whole blood or blood products to a blood support detachment in the Army or blood product depot 
in the Navy. 
The Army blood support detachment may be 
attached or assigned to an MMB. If a unit deploys 
without the MMB, the detachment will rely on the unit 
to which it is assigned for command and control and 
life support. A blood support detachment is generally 
collocated with an MLC or combat support hospital. 
The detachment provides flexibility to shift personnel 
between blood collection and distribution missions, as 
required. The basis of allocation is one blood support 
detachment per 100,000 soldiers in theater and one 
per 150,000 service members for joint operations. The 
blood support detachment provides refrigerated storage for 4,080 units of packed red blood cells, collecting 
up to 432 units of whole blood and distributing boxes 
of packed red blood cells and other blood products 
to echelon-above-brigade medical treatment facilities 
through three blood distribution teams (while not collecting or manufacturing blood). 
Medical units such as Army combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams, Marine Corps forward 
surgical groups, and Navy ships at sea or fleet surgical teams submit their requisitions to the supporting 
blood support detachment or blood product depot for 
emergency resupply or sustainment. MEDLOG units 
assist in blood distribution, planning, and delivery 
depending on the mission and location.
Medical Maintenance
Acquisition and distribution of high-quality, technically sophisticated, accurate, and often delicate medical 
equipment such as radiograph machines, computed 
tomography scanners, laboratory equipment, ventilators, and electrocardiogram machines require timely 
maintenance and repair. Military MEDLOG functions 
as the lifecycle technology manager for medical devices and systems. MEDLOG responsibilities include 
financial and budgetary management, service contract 
management, data processing systems for managing 
the medical equipment, and coordination of service 
agreements and in-house operations, acquisitions, 
property accountability, facilities, and patient safety. 
A primary function is to ensure that the medical 
equipment is safe, effective, and highly reliable for 
use by surgeons and other clinicians, nurses, and allied health staff members. This responsibility requires 
participation in the planning process and in the assessment of new technology, assuring regulatory 
compliance in the medical technology management 
area, investigation of incidents, and active participation in training and education of technical and medical 
personnel. The scope of these activities is expanding 
significantly as medical technology continues to become integrated into systems, and as the lines between 
medical, communications, and information systems 
continues to blur. At the operational level, the most 
readily available biomedical technician is located in 
the BMSO in the Army. Across the services, biomedical technicians are most often located at the MLC level 
and theater Role 3 hospitals. 
Optical Fabrication
From the MEDLOG perspective, optical fabrication 
focuses on the production of combat eye protection, 
protective mask inserts, tinted lens, frames of choice, 
flight frames, and standard issue (“5A”) frames. At the 
strategic level, the DoD executive agent for the optical 
fabrication enterprise is the Navy surgeon general; this 
authority is designated to the commanding officer of 
the Naval Ophthalmic Support and Training Activity 
to act as the program executor’s representative to provide the day-to-day oversight of the optical fabrication 
enterprise. At the operational level, the optical fabrication enterprise is comprised of 26 Navy and Army 
medical treatment facilities and TLAMM fabrication 
laboratories strategically located worldwide to manage fabrication assets and meet requirements for all 
services. At the tactical level, optical fabrication assets 
are located within MEDLOG companies, optometry 
detachments, and some ships at sea.
Patient Movement Items 
Patient movement items (PMIs) are specific medical equipment and supplies that are required to sup254
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
port patients during evacuation. PMIs include more 
expensive equipment requiring accountability at the 
intra-theater level, as well as less expensive, more 
numerous items such as litters, blankets, and litter 
straps, that must be a part of the planning process 
at the tactical level. The function of the PMI system 
is to support in-transit patients, exchange in-kind 
PMIs without degrading medical capabilities, and 
provide prompt recycling of PMIs. The PMI system 
provides seamless in-transit visibility for the equipment management process from initial movement to 
the patient’s final destination. Without accountability 
and a process of PMI exchange and replenishment, 
evacuation of patients and associated PMIs would 
quickly deplete front-line medical units of essential 
transport items. 
The US Transportation Command is the DoD’s 
single manager for patient movement (with the exception of intra-theater patient movement) and the 
program manager for the PMI system. The Air Force 
is responsible for resourcing, maintaining, and recycling PMIs to support contingency operations for 
patient movement. The Air Force is also responsible 
for the establishment of theater PMI centers and cells. 
Medical equipment designated for use as a PMI must 
be tested and certified for use on the appropriate 
patient evacuation platform (for example, fixed-wing 
or rotary-wing aircraft). A joint certification label is 
required to designate airworthiness certification for 
all PMI equipment. The label must be affixed to each 
piece of aeromedical evacuation-certified equipment. 
Intra-theater movement of PMIs is the responsibility 
of the combatant commander. As the theater matures, 
the combatant commander may establish a TLAMM or 
SIMLM. If established, the services will coordinate as 
necessary with the SIMLM for support in the areas of 
requisitioning, storage, maintenance, and distribution 
of PMIs. Forward distribution and exchange of PMIs 
is a SIMLM or service responsibility. Theater medical 
treatment facilities, MLCs, and surgical teams must 
coordinate with the theater PMI center for replacement 
in kind for PMI items. 
MEDICAL LOGISTICS LESSONS LEARNED
The medical staff officer and medical provider must 
work closely with MEDLOG staff at all levels to ensure 
required MEDLOG support. In every aspect of field 
medical operations, MEDLOG support requires close 
coordination with the personnel and systems that provide supplies, equipment, medical equipment repair, 
and other aspects of MEDLOG for effective mission execution. As described above, MEDLOG operations are 
a specialized, complex, and interconnected network 
of manufacturers, vendors, and other suppliers with 
automated tracking and delivery systems, all intended 
to meet medical support plan requirements as well 
as needs that emerge as the mission progresses. This 
includes sophisticated subsets of the overall process, 
such as cold chain management, which ensures the 
maintenance of temperature-controlled shipping and 
handling for items such as blood, medications, and 
vaccines. Success depends on clear communications, 
habitual training, and good working relationships 
between providers and the MEDLOG support community. The following section lists lessons learned 
and tips to assist medical staff officers and providers 
requiring MEDLOG support. 
Tips for the Provider 
 
• When coming to a new operational unit, first 
have the junior leaders describe their section’s capability and review the local standard 
operating procedures, then find the time to 
visually inspect the equipment and processes 
with the leaders you will be working with. 
 
• Look for anything expired, not calibrated, or 
missing, and ask who performs reconciliations 
with the supplier and how often. This will give 
you a sense of your organization’s readiness 
and operational capability. The budget may 
not support maintaining sets, kits, and outfits 
at 100%; however, the unit should maintain 
a current status of all shortages—even 
expendable items. Being aware of potential 
shortages will be key when requesting funds 
in support of exercises or deployments. 
 
• In general, every operational unit has a group 
of items designed to perform a specific task 
that provides basic essential combat casualty 
care for the military population (eg, medical 
equipment set in the Army, allowance standard in the Air Force, authorized medical and 
dental allowance lists in the Navy and Marine 
Corps). Each of these groups is designed to 
meet a specific set of treatment or prevention 
criteria. You must learn these criteria. No 
group of items will meet 100% of your needs, 
because the overall intent is to provide basic 
essential supplies and equipment. Therefore, 
if your mission requires more than what is 
available at your location, careful initial outfitting and sustainment planning must be done 
prior to deployment.
 
• Know the difference between a request and 
a requisition. Just because you request some255
Medical Logistics
thing in theater does not necessarily mean 
the medical logistician has completed all of 
the necessary steps to translate a request into 
a requisition, especially when faced with a 
large number of requests in a high operational 
tempo environment. Conduct measured follow-up by asking for the document number, 
and get updated informal status reports. 
Checklists and Planning Considerations
The following is a short list of key MEDLOG 
considerations for the healthcare provider in every 
mission.
 
• What is the source of Class VIII materiel? Who 
provides your tactical and operational level 
MEDLOG support?
 
• Do you have a close working or habitual relationship with your MEDLOG support? Have 
you adequately trained on the information 
systems and other administrative processes to 
ensure the outfitting and sustainment of your 
entire medical plan—from acute care and area 
medical support; to operative, nonoperative, 
nursing, and other care; laboratory and imaging; and biomedical equipment? 
 
• What is the funding source for use of military 
Class VIII materiel?
 
• Will blood products be required in this 
mission?
 
• Will other US government or non-DoD entities need our support? 
 
• What is the flow of patient movement items?
RESOURCES
Policy and practice change over time. Doctrine, 
that is, published official guidelines and policies, 
will change in content, but military references will 
retain their numeric designation. These publications 
can be monitored over time for key principles and 
practices.
 
• Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Healthcare Service Support. Washington, DC: JCS; 26 
July 2012. Joint Publication 4-02.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. 
Medical Logistics. Washington, DC: HQDA; 28 
January 2005. Army Regulation 40-61.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Army 
Medical Logistics. Washington, DC: HQDA; 
December 2009. Field Manual 4. 02. 1.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Operating Guide for MTOE Medical Equipment Maintenance. Washington, DC: HQDA; November 
2006. Technical Bulletin Medical 750-2.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Medical Operations. Washington, DC: USAF; 
29 September 2015. Air Force Doctrine Document 4-02.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Expeditionary Medical Logistics. Washington, 
DC: USAF; 5 October 2011. Air Force Tactics, 
Techniques and Procedures 3-42. 8.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Managing Clinical Engineering Programs. Washington, DC: USAF; 26 July 1994. Air Force 
Instruction 41-201.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Medical Logistics Support. Washington, DC: 
USAF; 6 October 2014. Air Force Instruction 
41-209.
SUMMARY
MEDLOG is a vital and irreplaceable element of 
medical support for global military operations. To be 
effective in contributing to mission success, MEDLOG 
requires agility, adaptive processes, specificity, and 
creativity. The primary tasks of the MEDLOG function 
are to provide medical materiel management; medical 
equipment maintenance and repair; optical fabrication; 
blood distribution management; centralized management of patient movement items; health facilities 
planning and management; and medical contracting. 
MEDLOG is a dynamic field of both peacetime and 
operational health services support that is concerned 
with the entire supply chain, from manufacturer to 
end-user of supplies, and from initial outfitting of a 
unit and its deployment of a device or piece of equipment, through obsolescence, disposal, and replacement 
with a more current or updated version.
The entire system of military MEDLOG involves 
organizations and units from the level of the DoD, 
through service-specific agencies, to organic elements 
of deployed field units. The MEDLOG tasks of acquiring and distributing Class VIII medical supplies and 
equipment are focused on supplying the combatant 
command-oriented organizations that manage these 
materiel needs globally on a regional basis.
The medical staff officer and healthcare provider 
must have an intimate understanding of MEDLOG, 
and they must develop key relationships with MED256
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
LOG personnel involved in tactical and operational 
actions. There is no substitute for careful planning for 
MEDLOG support, including training whenever possible with those who will provide this support during 
deployments and contingencies, while in garrison 
operations or predeployment preparations. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Healthcare Service Support. Washington, DC: JCS; 26 July 2012. Joint Publication 
4-02.
 
2. US Department of Defense. Class VIIIA Medical Materiel Supply Management. Washington, DC: DoD; 29 September 
2015. DoD Directive 5101. 09E.
 
3. Mark B, Sheikh H, Brenner S, Howe S. How militaries can improve medical logistics planning. Pricewaterhouse 
Coopers Strategy& website. http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/global/home/what-we-think/reports-white-papers/
article-display/militaries-improve-medical-logistics-planning. Published December 9, 2013. Accessed July 1, 2018.
 
4. Frise MM. Medical logistics in Regional Command North. Army Sustainment. 2012;44(5). http://www.alu.army.mil/
alog/issues/SepOct12/medical_logistics_regional_command_north.html. Accessed July 1, 2018.
 
5. Tudor W, Schubert S. Medical logistics operations on the Korean peninsula during Key Resolve 2010. Army Sustainment. 2011:43(3). http://www.alu.army.mil/alog/issues/mayjun11/med_log_korean.html. Accessed October 10, 2018.
 
6. Rodriquez EH. Crafting a sustainable medical logistics infrastructure for the Iraqi Ministry of Defense. Army Sustainment. 2012:44(1). http://www.alu.army.mil/alog/issues/JanFeb12/crafting_sustainable.html. Accessed July 1, 2018.
 
7. US Department of the Army. Assignment of US Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC) from US 
Army Medical Command to US Army Materiel Command (AMC). Washington, DC: HQDA; 3 October 2018. Executive 
Order 013-19.
