225
Health Information Systems
Chapter 15
HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS
MICHAEL J. STONE, MBA, MHA*
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
Information Systems
Health Information Systems
Health Information Technology 
Telehealth
RELEVANCE OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS TO MILITARY HEALTHCARE 
PROVIDERS
TYPES OF HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS
PRINCIPLES OF EFFECTIVE MILITARY HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEM 
EMPLOYMENT
Requirements Identification
Health Information Systems as a Component of a Comprehensive Health Delivery 
System
Cyber Security
Affordability and Sustainability
Provider and End-User Efficiency
MILITARY-SPECIFIC HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS
Interoperable
Operationally Viable
Sustainable and Dynamic
OTHER HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS CONSIDERATIONS FOR MILITARY 
MEDICAL OFFICERS
Procurement and Requirements Definition
Virtual Health Information Systems in Military Operations
Dependents in a Joint Military Environment
SUMMARY
*Lieutenant Colonel, Medical Service Corps, US Air Force; Assistant Professor, Department of Military & Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
226
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
keystones of medical operations in theater and at home. 
HISs play an integral role in military medicine. To 
maximize their effectiveness, medical officers must accurately identify requirements of HISs and constantly 
work to improve prevention of disease, non-battle, 
and combat injuries; to enable diagnosis; to mitigate 
the effects of these illnesses and injuries; to optimize 
recovery; and to eliminate waste from healthcare delivery procedures. 
Just as battlefield information is critical to understanding and managing the tactical and operational 
environment, medical information is critical for the uniformed medical community to conduct essential medical operations. Whether it is a simple communication 
system such as a handwritten prescription medication 
order or a more advanced treatment system such as the 
proper application of concentrated energy to eradicate 
cancer cells, health information systems (HISs) are 
DEFINITIONS
Information Systems
An information system (IS) is any mechanism 
whereby information can be communicated and acted 
on by one or more actors. For example, a checklist 
created for the week at the office is a system designed 
to keep individual and team energies and efforts appropriately focused. Epidemiological data comprises 
an IS designed to focus the limited resources and 
expertise of the medical and sanitation community 
on the key points of disease transmission. The data 
collected can help researchers discern the origin of a 
disease outbreak and potential action points to end an 
infectious epidemic. Finally, the magnetic resonance 
imaging scanner combines information-gathering tools 
to enable proper application of medical procedures or 
resources. ISs are primarily comprised of electronic 
devices but can either include or be completely fabricated of paper and pencil or handwritten components. 
Health Information Systems
HISs span a broad range of data management 
capabilities from locally developed, field-expedient 
methods to formal, system-wide electronic tools and 
databases.
The health information system provides the underpinnings 
for decision-making and has four key functions: data generation, compilation, analysis and synthesis, and communication and use. The health information system collects data 
from the health sector and other relevant sectors, analyses 
the data and ensures their overall quality, relevance and 
timeliness, and converts data into information for healthrelated decision-making. 1
The primary goal of HISs in military medicine is 
to exploit information to render high-quality health 
promotion and healthcare delivery at the right time, 
in the right place, and using the right resources. The 
combination of resources that comprise HISs in the 
Department of Defense (DoD) deliver information 
integral to the provision of effective health promotion 
and healthcare. They also aggregate information to 
advance knowledge in disease and injury prevention 
and management. 
The DoD uses various health information systems 
in its effort to provide comprehensive support to the 
entire community (eg, the TRICARE online patient 
portal mobile and the Military Health System GENESIS 
electronic records). The DoD is improving healthcare 
by investing in new HIS technology, modernizing 
health record systems, and promoting interoperability 
among different platforms for improved continuity of 
care for service members and military beneficiaries. 
Health Information Technology 
“The application of information processing involving both computer hardware and software that deals 
with the storage, retrieval, sharing, and use of healthcare information, data, and knowledge for communication and decision making”2 clearly defines technology. 
It is a broad concept that deals with knowledge and 
practical application of tools and systems. 
For health information technology, “technology” 
represents computers and communications elements 
that can be networked to build systems for moving 
health information. 3 The Defense Health Agency 
Health Information Technology Office (J6) is tasked 
with enabling joint, integrated healthcare to the entire 
DoD community.
Telehealth 
Telehealth is a collection of means or methods for enhancing healthcare, public health, and health education 
delivery and support using telecommunications technologies. 4 The DoD uses telehealth to help ensure the 
health of service members and other TRICARE beneficiaries by providing access to care for a wider range of 
medical conditions and geographic locations, including 
remote areas where service members may be injured. 
227
Health Information Systems
RELEVANCE OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS TO MILITARY HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS
Effective health promotion and sustainment, as 
well as healthcare delivery in military operations, 
hinges on accurate, timely, and complete information regarding patients, potential patients, and their 
environments. Prevention of injuries, illnesses, and 
combat wounds and their early detection, mitigation, and comprehensive treatment and management are heavily reliant upon data and information. Examples of ISs for healthcare include tests 
for coliform bacteria in a water source, lipstick for 
marking casualties in mass casualty triage, and the 
most sophisticated imaging technology pinpointing the location of shrapnel. Simple through highly 
technical resources are employed as components of 
ISs that are essential means of preserving health and 
life on the battlefield.
The impact of these systems is felt from point of 
injury to home station rehabilitation as patients experience a continuum of effective healthcare without 
suffering preventable complications, safety violations, or adverse side effects of therapeutic agents. 
Specifically, data captured at every stage of patient 
care provides the facts and evidence needed to render care absent adverse drug interactions or other 
complications that often result from missing data 
documenting care or medications administered. In 
addition, patient safety is preserved as the patient 
makes the journey to return to full health and function thanks to accurate capture of actions taken by 
medical professionals along the way. Physicians and 
other caregivers make informed decisions about each 
step in the patient’s treatment, resulting in positive 
cumulative effects rather than adverse reactions to 
the unknown. Without some type of IS, a provider 
cannot provide adequate care to patients or practice 
lifesaving preventive medicine that enables military 
personnel to succeed in their missions. 
Military providers, similar to all other healthcare 
providers, require a means of capturing and maintaining information regarding their patients’ health, the 
risk factors of the environment or military operation, 
and the ability to share that information with other 
caregivers and commanders as needed. Military HISs 
deliver this capability to the provider and enable application of this data resource throughout the military 
member’s service and beyond. It is imperative that 
military HISs capture all pertinent information for 
timely and effective health promotion, health sustainment, and healthcare delivery. This includes preventive medicine information such as immunizations, 
exposure data, DNA repository information, health 
status, and dental health status; diagnosis; prescriptions; drug allergies and interactions; imaging data; referral results; vital signs; allergies; and operative risks.
There are inherent accountability requirements and 
epidemiology interests that also drive the need for HISs 
in the military. The DoD is constantly evaluating the 
requirement for medical services and weighing options, 
such as having all home station care rendered in civilian 
networks with providers activated as military operations 
require, or sustaining the current military medical operations structure. HISs must be fluid and interoperable 
among facilities of the uniformed and civilian sides of 
healthcare in the military health system. Additionally, 
force health protection efforts are heavily influenced by 
epidemiological data analysis enabled by effective HISs. 
These factors highlight the relevance of HISs in the military health system and for the military medical provider. 
TYPES OF HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS
As mentioned previously, ISs can be as simple as 
when a nurse used a tube of lipstick to mark the foreheads of patients as being triaged during the attack on 
Pearl Harbor. This practice remains today when nurses, 
medics, corpsmen, dentists, or physicians use marking 
pens for the same purpose in mass casualty events. Numerous types of HISs may be devised or encountered 
while practicing medicine in a military environment. 
Triage during military operations or disaster 
response activities requires an IS to enable the effective and timely care of the ill, injured, or combat 
wounded. The systems currently employed during 
triage to document patients’ medical conditions 
range from grease pencils on laminated cards to land 
mobile radio systems to barcode scanning technologies. The application of handwritten information 
is the most basic level of HIS. This type of system 
requires a standard framework (foreheads, forms, 
standard terms, etc) and documentation resources 
(lipstick, grease pencil, marking pen, ballpoint pen, 
human blood, or other media). The requirement is 
for a simple system of patient category identification 
to enable proper medical care. Pen and paper, or 
other manual system of symbols and tools, comprise 
this basic form of HIS.
With the current level of technology, the electronic 
health record (EHR) serves as the most commonly 
recognized form of an HIS. The DoD’s EHR has been 
in development and refinement since at least the early 
1980s, with fielding of the current AHLTA (Armed 
Forces Health Longitudinal Technology Application) system from 2003 to 2004. The DoD released the 
228
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
results of its selection of vendor for the next generation joint service EHR in 2016, with continued efforts 
to standardize health records across the services. The 
vision for this system is one that would accurately 
document the health status and healthcare activities 
of a service member, from point of entry into military 
service through death, within DoD and Veterans Affairs healthcare systems. This requires interoperable 
HISs such as the VA’s choice of EHR systems. An 
EHR is a system that brings in data from human actors (administrators, laboratory technicians, nurses, 
physician assistants, physicians, dentists, and other 
healthcare providers), medical devices, and other 
HISs to form comprehensive health records. Patients 
and providers may communicate virtually, and it 
allows the patient to have clear and accurate information that reduces or eliminates medication or procedural errors. It is typically comprised of computer 
hardware and software capable of assembling, storing, and manipulating data from various sources. The 
value and impacts of this comprehensive EHR system 
are compelling. Today, service members can access 
health and healthcare information accumulated over 
multiple assignments in the continental United States 
or abroad. The information follows them into the 
Veterans Affairs system for care following discharge 
or for disability adjudication.
A third example of an HIS is an operating room suite 
system. The assembly of computer software, computer 
hardware, and sophisticated medical devices serve as 
an HIS to specifically support single or multiple surgical events. These include devices monitoring vital 
signs, streaming video, tools supplying images, devices performing procedures, and devices directing laser 
or radiant energy safely and with pinpoint accuracy. 
This form of system brings together a conglomerate 
of small and large systems for a specific purpose. The 
contributing systems may include an EHR and even a 
handwritten triage system. All of them come together 
in a unique application of resources as a health system 
with a limited but critical scope and purpose. This complex system of information gathering, analysis, and 
directed care delivery resembles the system designed 
to understand, fix, and destroy the enemy on a modern 
battlefield. The parallels between the utility of timely 
and precision warfighting and health sustainment and 
healthcare is apparent. 
HISs are prevalent in military medicine today 
and have great implications for medical practice. 
The basic constructs of the various systems are 
tailored to function under operational conditions. 
Whether it is a handwritten system, an electronic 
record, or a highly specialized suite of devices and 
applications, the ISs available in military and other 
medicine environments can be characterized by one 
of these formats.
PRINCIPLES OF EFFECTIVE HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEM EMPLOYMENT
Requirements Identification
Identification of process requirements for medical 
transactions is fundamental. At technology symposia 
for healthcare providers, vendors present their “silver 
bullet” systems as the solution to all practice needs. If 
commercial off-the-shelf HISs are acquired without 
thorough evaluation for military needs, resources 
will likely be wasted on a solution without a problem 
or a partial solution for a much more complex set of 
problems. The military context presents a unique set of 
environmental and contextual requirements for health 
systems. Military medical providers and all HIS users 
play essential roles in formulating the requirements of 
a desired system. Considerations include identifying 
optimal pharmaceuticals, surgical instruments, or intensive care devices, among many other criteria. It is 
critical for medical providers to identify requirements 
accurately and look for the problems or bottlenecks 
in procedures. Requirements drive development of 
HISs and other resources to address specific problems 
or needs. If this process is followed closely then the 
analysis of the current system is more likely to result 
in system improvements or new system design. These 
systems should benefit all involved across the entire 
spectrum of environments in which the IS will be applied now and into the conceivable future. 
It is in the accurate study of requirements and 
problem identification that so many projects fall short. 
Much like medical practitioners who do not complete a 
comprehensive analysis of the clinical situation before 
making a diagnosis, ISs are adopted as solutions to a 
problem when they really only address a symptom 
and often create more problems of their own.
Health Information Systems as a Component of a 
Comprehensive Health Delivery System
HISs are tools applied in concert with other resources 
and procedures to resolve a problem. The effectiveness 
of an HIS depends heavily on the procedures followed 
in a medical practice. For example, if a forward surgical 
team has very little time to stabilize a patient, then a bedside ultrasound, though a key to rapid diagnosis, cannot 
by itself deliver the stable patient. The ultrasound may 
capture gigabytes of data and provide elaborate reports 
229
Health Information Systems
when the real problem may be that the forward surgical 
team lacks the means to capture input from multiple 
devices to pinpoint an effective course of action. 
Cyber Security
Cyber security in healthcare is a crucial component of 
all HISs. The world of networked computers with countless software installations, downloads, uses, and global 
access presents a dynamic playground for malicious 
activity. Foreign actors and others wishing mal intent to 
the United States and partner nations are constantly attacking by means of cyber media. Healthcare provides a 
soft target for this activity if systems are employed under 
the naive assumption that healthcare is off limits in warfare. Security against external and internal actors must be 
a primary consideration for all types of health systems. 
Current medical devices are also HISs and are not immune from attack because they present entry points to 
defense ISs residing elsewhere on connected networks. 
Recent well-publicized events in which hackers 
have accessed protected personal patient information 
or held entire hospitals and healthcare systems hostage 
by denying access to their EHRs illustrates the extreme 
vulnerability of healthcare as a target for enemies or 
malicious actors. Proper active intervention and prevention efforts are critical to safeguarding the integrity and 
availability of information. Military providers practice 
in an environment where health information accessibility and interoperability must be balanced by adequate 
safeguards to prevent security breaches and data theft. 
Affordability and Sustainability
On analysis of current battlefield operations, there 
is a requirement for a patient tracking system that 
actively functions from point of injury or illness 
through definitive care. One of the key principles for 
effectively addressing this requirement is employment of an IS that is affordable and technologically 
viable to implement and sustain in a changing military environment. Myriad techniques or forms of 
ISs could address these requirements, but realistic 
design as well as project and operation costs are 
critical considerations. The system must be operationally viable and affordable while delivering the 
desired capability and capacity. Unfortunately, the 
sky is not the limit when it comes to ISs. Resources 
committed to building and sustaining HISs and 
health information technology compete with all 
other medical requirements and even the resources 
available to the warfighting community. It is critical 
to employ an IS management expert in the resolution 
of the budget–function conflict for optimal clinical 
and technical solutions.
Provider and End-User Efficiency
A key complaint about current EHR implementations is that they are very inefficient. Balancing the 
capabilities that ISs give to the provider, benefit the 
patient, and meet the needs of the organization or 
operation is a key principle of effective systems implementation. The drive for accuracy of information and 
accountability for actions is at the heart of the EHR 
revolution. Physicians complain that they spend much 
longer with the EHR than they ever did with patients 
using a paper chart. They also indicate that the EHR 
does not improve care. It is focused instead on the 
information that can be used for better epidemiology 
and accounting for actions taken, such as medications 
prescribed or medical history. 5 Streamlining systems 
and making them more efficient is an important goal 
for any effective HIS. 
MILITARY-SPECIFIC HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS
The military health system operates in fixed facilities, 
in forward operating mobile facilities, and at battlefield 
points of injury. Consideration for environmental and 
other constraints placed on ISs in military operations 
must be a priority. For example, some military operations 
are conducted in areas with excess heat and dust levels 
that require hardened devices and optimized cooling 
capabilities. In other cases, devices must be hardened 
against moisture when deployed to regions with extremely wet conditions. Often, power sources in austere 
environments are unstable, so information technology 
must be hardened against power surges to prevent damage to sensitive components. In all of these cases there is 
a requirement for secure communications that drives a 
need for infrastructure and service provision, which are 
difficult even under ideal conditions. Given the wide 
range of operational conditions and variables, a military 
HIS requires a robust design to ensure success. There 
are three key requirements that enable the successful 
deployment of any HIS supporting military medicine.
Interoperable
Given joint service and international partner involvement in current and future military operations, 
the ISs employed to support medical treatment require the capability to easily exchange information. 
Beyond the challenges of interoperability across the 
230
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
DoD, military HISs may also need to be compatible 
with those from partner nations, or at least be able to 
bridge any gaps. 
In the best case, systems would be interoperable and 
have data and information sharing functionality across 
various platforms and technologies. This includes 
provider notes as well as any images or lab results that 
are rendered in the course of care from point of injury 
to home station. In a simpler example, handwritten 
patient records require the use of weatherproof paper 
and writing utensils.
Unfortunately, interoperability is a major unmet 
requirement. Electronic HISs are not typically interoperable across military facilities, organizations, 
or services, or even within a single enterprise in the 
civilian sector. The DoD and the Veterans Administration are working diligently to establish and sustain interoperable systems to ensure well-managed, 
cradle-to-grave medical care for service members. 
This is a vital component to meeting the militaryunique mission. The end result would be visibility of 
all medical actions taken from the start of a service 
member’s career to their death. This not only enables 
mission readiness but opens doors to epidemiological 
research that will shape preventive medical practices 
of the future. 
Operationally Viable
Though much of the work done with systems in 
military medicine takes place in fixed facilities, military 
personnel are deployed to austere and remote environments where ISs lack the commonly required support 
systems. Thus, as modeled by the example of using a 
tube of lipstick to facilitate communication in patient 
triage, a system must be able to function despite the 
lack of typically required resources. 
There is a finite amount of bandwidth in austere environments, which sometimes may limit data sharing 
and storage. It is critical that the medical bandwidth 
requirement is voiced loud and clear while understanding the warfighter mission needs. Balance among 
competing requirements is essential for all aspects of 
military operations.
Modern technology significantly enhances the list of 
available options. Handheld devices and mobile computing make point of injury care support possible in 
virtually any location on the globe. This in turn means 
that patient information can follow the service member 
back to home station for continuity of care. Of course, 
the technology must be shielded from or resistant to 
the elements (heat, moisture, cold, turbulence, etc) as 
well as the operational hazards such as spills, drops, 
or bumps. This principle of operational viability highlights the unique requirements of the military health 
operational environments.
Sustainable and Dynamic 
Already a significant challenge even absent the 
military context, HISs must stand the test of time to 
be effective. This means the health system must be 
technologically sustainable and adaptable to changing conditions. The requirement to monitor the care 
of service members for approximately 60 to 80 years 
in conjunction with the rapid evolution of technology 
could prove cost prohibitive. A vital component of 
achieving a sustainable system is the proactive involvement of medical personnel in ongoing requirements 
and system development. When ISs are left to administrative personnel to sustain and design, their requirements are prioritized, often at the expense of clinical 
functionality. Military medical providers should be 
actively engaged in design and modification of HISs 
to ensure the integrity and functionality of systems 
required to effectively support military operations of 
all kinds. With technology having a lifespan of 2 to 
4 years, the systems employed must be dynamic in 
nature, with the primary goal of seamless continuity 
in care over a lengthy period of time. 
OTHER HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICERS
Military medical officers should be able to identify 
key components of ISs, assess the relevance of various 
forms of ISs in military medicine, discuss the challenges of deploying these ISs into austere environments, 
and look at specific examples and applications of HISs 
in the military environment.
Personnel often adapt to the systems the enterprise 
provides without ever giving input to development 
or procurement actions. This can lead to the employment of systems that lack the functionality required 
by clinicians to effectively care for assigned personnel 
under a broad range of military circumstances and 
conditions. Positive engagement and participation 
in HIS development offers a long-range benefit for 
all military medical providers and patients through 
system functional improvement. 
Procurement and Requirements Definition
The process of acquiring and operationalizing a 
system in the joint military environment is lengthy 
and exhaustive. If done with a clear understanding 
231
Health Information Systems
of all requirements, the resulting resource will be an 
effective instrument for excellent healthcare across the 
full spectrum of military operations. However, lack of 
focus on or exclusion of requirements in the procurement process results in wasted time and effort when 
required patient care delivery needs go unanswered. 
It is critical that medical professionals make time to 
participate in procurement of HISs so that clinical 
operations are adequately considered and addressed.
Medical professionals often lament delays in implementing new technology that are seemingly caused by 
cyber security requirements. This is a misconception 
born of not considering security early in the procurement or development process. The real danger would 
be to ignore security requirements and sacrifice the 
availability, security, or integrity of both health and 
defense information, facilitating exploitation of the resultant security weaknesses. It is imperative that health 
professionals take a proactive approach to security and 
seek opportunities for strengthening security through 
their chain of command, development committees, or 
other available venues. Security should be built into 
systems and devices as they are introduced rather 
than being added through modification or retrofitting 
later, which causes operational and financial burdens. 
Specifically, health professionals must consider the 
information they are handling and recommend system 
operating procedures that preserve its availability, accessibility, and security while minimally disrupting the 
flow of patient care. For example, medical personnel 
can help safeguard systems by supporting and promoting introduction of proximity cards or biometric log-in 
components to systems that protect information with 
minimal disruption.
Virtual Health Information Systems in Military 
Operations
With current technologies, the military can exploit 
connectivity on almost any point around the globe 
to support patient–provider interactions. This can 
translate to a soldier or marine on the battlefield, a 
pilot on the flight line, or a sailor onboard a ship far 
out to sea getting direct treatment from a specialist 
back at medical center through video conference on a 
medic’s handheld device. Telemedicine presents military operations with the ability to take a virtual doctor 
or nurse into some of the most austere locations with 
no risk to the medical professional. Better still is the 
resulting level of care available to service members at 
the point of injury. Pictures (of dermatological conditions, for example) or digital images (of ultrasounds 
or x-rays) can be rapidly sent to higher echelons of 
care for analysis and recommendations for treatment 
or evacuation. 
Military medical professionals must continuously 
think innovatively when it comes to provision of 
the right care at the right time, and virtual medicine 
establishes the ability to do so in any place. Security 
considerations, both generic and specifically targeted 
to patient protection, are key and should be a point 
of focus as medical personnel work to improve their 
reach and influence.
Dependents in a Joint Military Environment 
One of the key requirements of any medical system 
is establishing a pool of skilled providers and a means 
of maintaining currency in those skill sets. The military 
relies on health providers to be current in the skills of 
their specialty when called upon to support operations. 
The HIS employed in the military has very similar 
requirements for effectiveness and currency. Family 
members and other dependents of military personnel 
provide a population capable of sustaining currency 
for both the health provider and the HIS through the 
care provided by military medical professionals. A 
system that can support cradle-to-grave preventive 
medicine and healthcare delivery for the extended 
military family can also do so for military personnel.
HIS capabilities of continuity of care, interoperability, global access, and virtual medical practice are 
developed and sustained in peacetime to guarantee 
availability for operations when events require them. 
Though care for family members does not typically 
occur in austere environments, it does provide the 
context for developing solid practice guidelines that 
are evidence based and patient focused. This is key 
to effective medical care delivery regardless of the 
environment.
SUMMARY
From the first instance of military medical care 
to the present day, HISs have played a vital role 
in the effective delivery of care. Ultimately, the 
effective, efficient, timely, and precise protection 
of human health and the delivery of healthcare is 
a function of gathering, analyzing, and making 
critical decisions based on data compiled over time 
and space. This information matures into knowledge through context, and is refined into wisdom 
through experience. 
It is ultimately the responsibility of medical professionals to ensure that patient information is available, 
accurate, and safeguarded, through diligent use of 
the tools provided by the DoD. HISs are designed to 
232
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
provide these services and then leveraged to ensure 
the protection of the community and the military force, 
and to ensure provision of the best medical care. Skilled 
healthcare professionals must be actively involved in 
identifying clinical requirements, and procuring and 
sustaining available, accurate, and safe HISs. Input by 
healthcare professionals is vital to the effective employment of these systems. 
REFERENCES
 
1. World Health Organization. Health Information Systems: Toolkit on Monitoring Health Systems Strengthening. http://
www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/toolkit_hss/EN_PDF_Toolkit_HSS_InformationSystems.pdf. Published June 2008. 
Accessed January 3, 2018.
 
2. Brailer D. The Decade of Health Information Technology: Delivering Consumer-Centric and Information-Rich Healthcare 
Framework for Strategic Action. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services; 2004. Report to Secretary 
of Health and Human Services.
 
3. Health information technology. Wikipedia Web site. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Health_information_technology. 
Updated January 9, 2018. Accessed January 11, 2018.
 
4. What is telehealth? Center for Connected Health Policy, The National Telehealth Policy Resource Center Web site. 
http://www.cchpca.org/what-is-telehealth. Published 2008. Accessed January 11, 2018.
 
5. Irving, F. Docs say how they really feel about EHRs. Healthcare IT News. November 13, 2014. http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/docs-say-how-they-really-feel-about-ehrs. Accessed January 11, 2018.
