193
Combined Health Services Support Operations
Chapter 13
COMBINED HEALTH SERVICES 
SUPPORT OPERATIONS
MARTIN C. BRICKNELL, MD, PhD*
INTRODUCTION
WHY COALITIONS OR ALLIANCES?
HISTORICAL EXAMPLES OF MILITARY MEDICAL COLLABORATION
PRINCIPLES OF MULTINATIONAL MEDICAL SUPPORT
MULTINATIONAL INTEGRATED MEDICAL UNITS
INDIGENOUS FORCES AS PART OF A COALITION
KEYS TO SUCCESS IN MULTINATIONAL MEDICAL COLLABORATION
CONCLUSION
*Lieutenant General, Surgeon General, Headquarters Joint Medical Group, Coltman House, Defence Medical Services (Whittington), Tamworth Road, 
Lichfield, Staffordshire; Professor of Conflict and Health, Conflict and Health Research Group, King’s Centre for Global Health, Kings College, London, 
United Kingdom
194
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
INTRODUCTION
Future military operations are likely to be conducted in a combined, joint, interagency, or multinational 
(CJIM) environment. This chapter examines the opportunities and challenges associated with partnering 
in a CJIM environment to deliver the military medical 
mission. The chapter opens by considering the strategic purpose of coalitions or alliances and how they 
enhance efficiency and effectiveness in health service 
support. The chapter then examines the principles of 
multinational medical support and the compromises 
nations must accept if this type of operation is to be 
successful. The United States and the United Kingdom 
(UK) have participated in multinational integrated 
medical units (MIMUs) over the past 2 decades, and 
lessons learned in these operations will be highlighted in the MIMU section. It is vital to consider 
efforts in working and partnering with the medical 
services of indigenous security forces as part of 
the CJIM environment, which will be introduced 
in the section on indigenous forces. Health sector 
capacity building, however, is too big a subject to 
cover fully here. This chapter will focus on generic 
organizational learning; readers should consult 
higher command authorities and legal staff before 
entering into formal relationships with other nation’s medical services. 
WHY COALITIONS OR ALLIANCES?
The international order is defined by the existence 
of sovereign states with unitary authority within their 
geographical boundaries. Relationships between sovereign states are determined by international law and 
states’ obligations within the alliances and agreements 
they have made in the global arena. It is extremely 
unlikely that any future conflict will be characterized by a single sovereign nation from the developed 
world entering a conflict with another single nation. 
Most developed nations’ security strategies1,2 are underpinned by the treaties and alliances that govern 
the balance of power among nations. For the United 
States and the UK, the two primary alliances are the 
United Nations (UN) and the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO). However, there are many other 
alliances, often based on regional or technical security 
cooperation requirements. The ABCA Armies program 
(United States, Great Britain, Canada, Australia, and 
New Zealand) was set up in 1947 to optimize interoperability, training, and equipment among the Englishspeaking armies that fought together in World War II. 
Similar arrangements are in place for other services: 
the Air and Space Interoperability Council for air 
forces, AUSCANNZUKUS for navies, and Five Eyes 
for intelligence. 
Nations are highly likely to seek international 
partners when they plan to use military force as an 
instrument of national power. Thus, nations invest 
a considerable amount of time and resources in 
building relationships with their allies to achieve the 
maximum effectiveness of collaborative action during combat. This enables the mobilization of political 
opinion, the summative action of military force, and 
sharing of costs (money and casualties) so that the 
cumulative effect in mobilizing power against an 
adversary is synergistic. 
Effective coalition or alliance collaboration is especially important and effective in military medicine, 
for the care of military casualties is not dependent on 
unique differences determined by political boundaries, and most nations have difficulty mobilizing 
the medical staffing and resources to manage their 
casualty flow independently. Between nations within 
long-standing alliances, medical collaboration is 
likely to focus on interoperability so that both nations can care for casualties of the other nationality, 
and each can have complete confidence in the other’s 
competence. These goals are most critical when the 
total deployment of medical services can be reduced 
by burden sharing between nations. In areas where 
developed-world military forces are attempting to 
have a stabilizing effect, it is likely there will be a 
medical capability-building requirement. Exhibit 13-1 
lists examples of current military medical alliances 
and organizations.
In addition to collaboration on the organizational 
design of the medical support system, it is also important to consider the value of clinical information 
exchange between nations. This includes conventional 
mechanisms of knowledge exchange such as clinical 
conferences and publication of results of clinical research. Some alliances have more structured mechanisms such as standardization agreements for clinical 
practice, clinical equipment, and information exchange 
between nations. Therefore, it is essential that military 
medical personnel have the organizational and interpersonal skills to be effective in working with medical 
personnel from other nations and cultures as part of 
their contribution to effective coalition and alliance 
operations.
195
Combined Health Services Support Operations
EXHIBIT 13-1
CURRENT MILITARY MEDICAL ALLIANCES AND ORGANIZATIONS
International Committee of Military Medicine. Purpose is to maintain and strengthen the bonds of 
professional collaboration between members of the armed forces medical services of all states. 
http://www.cimm-icmm.org/index_en.php 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization Committee of the Chiefs of Military Medical Services. The senior 
committee for medical care within NATO. Acts as the central point for the development and coordination of military medical matters and for providing medical advice to the NATO Military Committee. 
http://www.coemed.org/comeds 
Confédération Interalliée des Officiers Médicaux de Réserve (Interallied Confederation of Medical Reserve Officers). To contribute positively to the organization and readiness of the military health 
services of NATO member nations, thereby enhancing their effective function both nationally and 
internationally. Further, to promote in every possible way the standardization and interoperability of 
those medical services during peace or war. 
http://www.ciomr.org/ 
Asia-Pacific Military Health Exchange. Annual conference for military healthcare professionals from 
across the Indo-Asia-Pacific region to discuss health topics affecting the region and to collaborate on 
issues such as disaster response, medical readiness, and improvements in the delivery of healthcare. 
https://community.apan.org/conf/apmhe/ 
American British and Canadian Australian Armies (ABCA) Quadripartite Working Group on Health
Service Support. Working group of health service support representatives of participating armies; 
principal activity involves the progression of standardization tasks on health service support issues 
identified and prioritized by armies.
HISTORICAL EXAMPLES OF MILITARY MEDICAL COLLABORATION
Almost all military operations of the 20th and 
early 21st century have been based on coalitions or 
alliances. This short section will highlight some key 
observations about the breadth of issues addressed 
as part of combined medical planning. The military 
medical histories of both World War I and World War 
II contain descriptions of the inter-allied coordination 
mechanisms for medical care of each nation’s casualties. This was especially important on the western 
front in both wars to ensure both effective dispersion 
of military casualties in the United Kingdom as the 
strategic base for the British Armed Forces, and the 
strategic embarkation of North American casualties 
(US and Canadian) prior to the long sea journey back 
to their home nation.
After World War II, conflict shifted to Asia. Japan 
became an important strategic hub for allied casualties 
during the Korean War. The conflict in Vietnam introduced the complexity of medical capacity-building for 
indigenous security forces and the consideration of 
using military medicine to help care for civilian casualties of the conflict. In Western Europe during the Cold 
War, NATO developed sophisticated mechanisms for 
coordinating the medical evacuation system as part of 
military planning to counter the threat of invasion by 
Warsaw Pact forces from the east. Figure 13-1 shows 
a comparison of command arrangements published in 
the 1986 NATO Interoperability Handbook.
The campaign to liberate Kuwait was the biggest 
military operation of the late 20th century. In addition 
to the UK and United States, New Zealand, Norway, 
Romania, Singapore, and Sweden contributed medical units to the coalition. These units were integrated 
into the medical plan and contributed particularly to 
the medical treatment of enemy prisoners of war. 3–5
International peacekeeping efforts in the Balkans 
during the 1990s were initially conducted under UN 
command but shifted to NATO control after the Dayton 
196
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
Figure 13-1. Comparison of NATO medical command arrangements. 
Reproduced from: NATO Interoperability Handbook. London, UK: British Army; 1986: Figure 4-1. Army Code No. 71376, February 1986. 
Peace Accord. NATO also acted as the alliance mechanism to command military operations in Kosovo. 
NATO provided the forum for coordinating medical 
support arrangements, including coordination with 
indigenous health systems and international agencies. 6 
This included the development of MIMUs in Sipovo, 
Bosnia and Camp Bondsteel in Kosovo. 7 
The initial phase of Operation Iraqi Freedom, the 
invasion of Iraq, was a bilateral operation involving 
the UK and United States. The number of coalition 
troops from contributing nations varied during the 
subsequent counter-insurgency campaign. However, 
the United States provided the leadership framework 
for the organization of medical support across the 
theater of operations, including the medical capability 
program for Iraqi security forces.
In Afghanistan, NATO and the United States operated alongside each other until it became a unified 
theater command during 2006 under the UN-mandated 
International Stabilisation Afghanistan Force (ISAF). 
Medical support was coordinated at the strategic level 
by the Allied Command Operations Headquarters in 
Mons, Belgium. Operational coordination was achieved 
through multinational medical steering groups for each 
ISAF region and organized by the NATO Joint Force 
Command at Brunssum. The medical director and joint 
medical staff branch at ISAF headquarters in Kabul 
directed in-theater medical support. 8
The same type of coordination occurred in the 
clinical domain. In the First World War, lessons from 
the medical treatment of casualties were shared at 
a series of inter-allied medical conferences in 1917, 
and common clinical treatments were published in 
a series of collaborative books. 9 During World War 
II, the UK and United States actively coordinated in 
medical research. The most prominent example of this 
collaboration was the introduction of penicillin as the 
first true antibiotic. 10 This collaboration is currently 
maintained through a broad series of NATO medical 
working groups that produce NATO standardization 
agreements. The research community collaborates 
through health and medical research groups within 
197
Combined Health Services Support Operations
the NATO Technical Co-operation Council Programme. The shared experience of combat casualty 
care between the United States and UK in Iraq and 
Afghanistan has led to fully transparent information 
exchange between both nations’ joint theater trauma 
registries.
PRINCIPLES OF MULTINATIONAL MEDICAL SUPPORT
Coalitions or alliances exist to increase the collective effort of nations to achieve their aims. The nations 
involved agree to delegate authority to coalition/alliance commanders for defined purposes and tasks. 
However, nations are likely to retain a sovereign veto 
over activities conducted by their forces, including 
rules of engagement and risk. Thus, nations are likely 
to nominate a “national contingent commander” who 
executes this authority within the coalition. Nations 
retain responsibility for the provision and quality of 
medical support to their forces even if they have delegated the arrangements for delivery of this medical 
support to a coalition or other nation. 11
Multinational medical support aims to provide 
a solution to the challenges of providing medical 
support to the CJIM operating environment through 
collaborative planning, coordinated deployment, and 
mutually agreed employment of the medical force. 
This has the potential to provide greater efficiency in 
the use of medical resources by reducing duplication, 
and to promote greater effectiveness by making niche 
specialist national capabilities available to the whole 
entitled population at risk.
Multinational medical support is underpinned by 
formal processes and procedures agreed upon by all 
nations. NATO has the most sophisticated hierarchy 
of such agreements, which are formally published 
as standardization agreements. These agreements 
are intended to be binding on alliance nations, so 
medical personnel employed on NATO operations 
must be familiar with these documents in addition 
to national medical policies and procedures. ABCA 
bases its standardization on NATO documentation 
and has published its own Coalition Health Interoperability Handbook as high-level guidance. 12 The UN 
also has specific guidance for the medical support 
arrangements and standards for its peacekeeping 
operations. 13
Nations may contribute to multinational medical 
support in one of four ways14:
 
• Coexistence. Medical capabilities exist concurrently at the same time and in the same place 
in the military operation. Even at this low 
level of interaction, it is important to have an 
agreed-on means of communication between 
medical units. This situation may occur because the variation in capability, language, 
and clinical practice is so great that it is not 
practical for military patients to be shared 
between facilities. 
 
• Cooperation. Specific arrangements have 
been made to allow exchange of information 
between national medical facilities. Also, 
national contingent commanders may make 
their medical facilities available to patients 
from other nations.
 
• Coordination. In these circumstances, national medical facilities have been formally 
declared as part of the multinational force and 
therefore the medical staff in the coalition/alliance command chain have specific authority 
over national medical facilities. This might 
include the authority to direct the admission 
of patients to the facility or to move the facility in accordance with the coalition/alliance 
commander’s plan.
 
• Integration. Nations may agree to combine 
medical resources into an integrated medical force such that all medical capability of 
the force is under a unified command. This 
might be at a task-force level, whereby nations contribute discrete medical forces (eg, an 
ambulance troop from one nation and medical detachments from other nations under a 
single command headquarters); or it might 
be at the level of a MIMU, in which personnel 
from more than one nation are employed in a 
single unit.
The coalition/alliance command system must 
include a medical staff branch with sufficient medical staff to provide medical advice to the planning 
process, to coordinate medical operations and 
evacuation, to collate medical reports, and to provide 
technical guidance to the military force. The command surgeon/medical director (there is a difference 
between US and NATO terminology for the same role) 
must establish the extent of his or her authority over 
each medical unit in theater. It is likely that Role 1 
(immediate medical support to battalion or smaller 
elements) will be a national responsibility, and Role 
2 and 3 (deployed hospital care) may have a stronger 
command relationship to the coalition headquarters. 
Figure 13-2 shows a combined, joint medical evacuation rehearsal of concept drill in Afghanistan.
198
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
MULTINATIONAL INTEGRATED MEDICAL UNITS
the UK experience is that the senior clinician (the deployed medical director in UK terminology or deputy 
commander for clinical services in US Army terminology) has a pivotal role in establishing a collaborative 
professional forum among the senior clinical staff from 
each nation. 15 The MMMSG must determine if national 
personnel are employed as discrete clinical teams or 
if the clinical teams are to be multinational. The UK 
experience suggests that it is better to create a single 
identity for the MIMU by mixing all personnel rather 
than to risk nations forming national clinical cliques. It 
is likely that a nation will volunteer to act as lead nation 
and take responsibility for overall tactical organization 
of the MIMU. Lead nation responsibility may include 
coordination of predeployment training, provision of 
medical equipment, confirmation of credentialing, and 
development of clinical protocols and procedures. 
At a minimum, all nations will need to establish a 
national contingent commander and a national patient 
liaison officer. It is the UK experience that it is preferable to conduct organizational and clinical training for 
the whole contingent before deployment if possible. 
This allows the contingent to get to know each other, to 
establish professional relationships, and to identify any 
variations in clinical practice or professional duties that 
require clarification to ensure effective teamwork. At 
a personal level, it is vital to recognize the importance 
of flexibility and open-mindedness when assigned to 
a multinational medical unit or as part of a coalition 
medical force. Everyone is the product of their own 
national culture, but there is not necessarily a single 
right way to approach clinical care for patients. 
Some countries have clearly prescribed clinical 
practice guidelines for the clinical management of 
defined conditions (Joint Theater Trauma System 
Clinical Practice Guidelines in the United States 
and Clinical Guidelines for Operations in the UK). 
Wherever possible, clinical leaders should negotiate 
an agreement that clarifies which national guidelines 
are the authoritative reference for clinical practice in 
a MIMU. Additionally, there is likely to be variation 
in the employment of clinical specialists, particularly 
nurses. For example, the US employs certified registered nurse anesthetists and physician assistants to 
undertake duties that are the prerogative of registered 
medical practitioners in many countries. These differences will need to be identified and agreement 
reached on the scope of practice for these clinicians 
within the clinical team. 
Additional variations and issues will need consideration. Trade names for drugs vary among nations, 
so it is essential that international non-proprietary 
Because human physiology and pathophysiology 
are the same regardless of nationality or ethnic background, casualties can receive medical care independent of the national provider. Military medical units 
may be formed with contributions from more than one 
nation as MIMUs. These have successfully delivered 
coalition medical support in many operations, particularly in Afghanistan. In Kandahar, the NATO Role 3 
facility was successively led by Canada and then the 
United States, incorporating medical personnel from 
Canada, the United States, the UK, Australia, Holland, 
and other countries, from all three service branches of 
each nation. In Helmand, the UK led the Camp Bastion 
Role 3 facility, incorporating personnel from the UK, 
United States, Denmark, Estonia, and other nations.
Successful operation of a MIMU is dependent on 
effective leadership and staff coordination from the 
defense ministry or department down to functional 
level within the unit itself. The NATO experience has 
demonstrated the value of a multinational medical 
management steering group (MMMSG), chaired by 
the coalition strategic headquarters and attended by 
representatives from each nation and the in-theater 
command chain. The MMMSG owns the formal technical agreement that binds each nation to the MIMU and 
supervises the detailed coordination of the capability 
requirement, the joint manning document and credentialing arrangements, the financial arrangements, the 
force generation and rotation arrangements, and the 
dispute settling mechanism.
The MMMSG will establish the command arrangements and the contribution of personnel by each nation. 
In addition to the key role of the commanding officer, 
Figure 13-2. Combined, joint medical evacuation rehearsal of concept drill, Regional Command South, Kandahar, Afghanistan 2009.
199
Combined Health Services Support Operations
names be used for all prescriptions. International 
variation in testing and accountability for blood 
products is likely to require the administration of 
national blood products to casualties from specific 
nations if the national blood supply systems can 
support it (otherwise specific dispensations may be 
required). Finally, it will be necessary to establish a 
mechanism for mediation of differences of practice 
between clinicians in order to ensure that variations 
in individual clinical practice do not undermine 
confidence in the multinational medical system. The 
command team should set up internal team meetings 
to ensure effective collaboration and accommodate 
national sensitivities.
INDIGENOUS SECURITY FORCES AS PART OF A COALITION
As stated earlier, it is highly likely that local or 
indigenous security forces will be part of a coalition 
operation. The mission may involve capacity-building 
with these forces, including supporting the development of their medical capabilities. Security operations 
will likely be conducted with indigenous security 
forces alongside international coalition forces. This 
type of coalition medical activity is very different 
from working with established Western partnerships. 
The international coalition may allow indigenous 
casualties to be treated by coalition medical units in 
an emergency, but it is highly unlikely that the local 
medical capability will be sufficiently competent to 
treat international casualties. Therefore, it will be 
necessary to establish collaboration and coordination mechanisms that include the medical services of 
indigenous security forces. This collaboration can be 
divided into two types: medical planning and medical 
capability development.
The principles of planning for medical arrangements for indigenous security force casualties are no 
different from those that apply to international coalition forces. A clinical pathway from point of injury to 
rehabilitation is required, including coordination for 
medical evacuation from the field and transfer from 
coalition facilities to indigenous facilities. It is possible 
that the local medical system is different for the army 
and police, so arrangements for casualties from these 
services may vary. Coalition medical staff will need 
to consider the ethical issues associated with handing over indigenous casualties to medical facilities 
with lower capabilities and the possibility of worse 
patient outcomes. This is a matter partially controlled 
by International Law, Protocol 1, 1977, of the Geneva 
Convention (see Chapter 6, The Law of Armed Conflict 
and Military Medicine), as well as by rules of engagement issued by higher headquarters. 
It is imperative that medical officers become aware 
of these rules prior to taking up their duties, as well as 
knowing how to obtain exceptions to them (see the discussion of rules of engagement and ethically driven exceptions in Chapter 5, Military Law and Ethics). There 
may be value in establishing a formal framework for 
analyzing ethical issues such as the “four-quadrant” 
approach (medical implications, patient preferences, 
quality of life, contextual factors) so that the clinical 
team has an agreed-upon methodology for examining 
these issues. 16 Figure 13-3 shows a coalition medical 
planning meeting in Kandahar in 2010 attended by 
representatives from the UK, United States, Canada, 
Afghan army, Afghan public health department, and 
the US Agency for International Development.
The subject of indigenous medical capability development for partner security forces is too great to 
cover fully within this chapter. However, a number 
of key issues should be considered within the subject 
of coalition/multinational medical support. Medical 
capability development must be underpinned by a 
strategic analysis of the requirement and subsequent 
plan that includes an assessment of the resources 
needed to achieve the desired outcomes. Ideally this 
would be agreed upon by the coalition and include the 
assignment of international medical forces to the tasks. 
This plan should cover all of the DOTMLPF (doctrine, 
organization, training, materiel, leadership, personnel, facilities) domains of a capability solution. Local 
partners should also agree to the plan, which should 
be sensitive to local cultural and clinical practices.
KEYS TO SUCCESS IN MULTINATIONAL MEDICAL COLLABORATION
The foundations for success are based on the cultural alignment of the collaborating nations. Medical 
support is underpinned by the provisions of international humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions, 
which dictate the ethical behavior of medical personnel 
during conflict. Medical support should be based on 
collaborative planning that provides for all casualties 
of conflict, including international coalition troops, 
indigenous security forces, civilians, and enemy 
combatants. The role of medical organizations and 
personnel in this effort will be determined by coalition 
agreements and national limitations. The coalition 
medical leadership team will need to understand these 
agreements and limitations by seeking information 
200
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
through formal and informal channels. 
All members of the coalition medical leadership 
team need to understand their own and partner nations’ doctrine and clinical practice, including anything 
covered by international agreements. 17 This requires 
a significant amount of predeployment preparation. 
The team will need to invest in developing personal 
relationships, which requires a substantial amount of 
time out of the office visiting coalition medical facilities 
and units. All personnel need to be sensitive to differences in national culture, even if speaking a common 
language. In the end, leadership success is based on 
appealing to a sense of collective commitment to caring 
for patients that transcends national politics.
CONCLUSION
Coalitions and alliances are the most likely frameworks for future military operations. These are built 
from continuous exchange and dialogue among 
personnel from all the nations involved. It is vital to 
commit time and resources to enable the development 
of personal relationships among the multinational 
personnel, which provide the foundations for success. 
These relationships range from formal senior-level 
talks, through information sharing at conferences, 
practicing interoperability in military exercises, and 
down to individuals attending education courses 
in each participating nation. The medical services 
are ideally positioned to be exemplars in this field 
because of a strong focus on patients, a culture of 
knowledge sharing, and having few political or security constraints.
REFERENCES
 
1. US Department of Defense. Quadrennial Defence Review 2014. Washington, DC: DoD; 2014. http://archive.defense.gov/
pubs/2014_Quadrennial_Defense_Review.pdf. Accessed June 30, 2017.
 
2. National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015. London, England; HMSO; 2015. CM9161. https://
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/555607/2015_Strategic_Defence_and_Secu 
rity_Review.pdf. Accessed June 30, 2017.
 
3. Dauphinee WE. Stretching the Resources: Medical Support for Canada’s Military Commitment to the Gulf War. http://history.
amedd.army.mil/booksdocs/AMEDDinODS/AMEDDODS1Dauphinee.pdf. Accessed June 30, 2017.
 
4. Bricknell MCM. The evolution of casualty evacuation in the British Army in the 20th century (Part 3) – 1945 to present. 
J R Army Med Corps. 2003;149:85–95. doi:10. 1136/jramc-149-01-20.
 
5. Leitch RA. The impact of enemy prisoners of war on medical planning—lessons from Operation Desert Storm. J US 
Army Med Dep. 1994;Jan-Feb:19–22. http://history.amedd.army.mil/booksdocs/AMEDDinODS/AMEDDODSADSLeitch.
pdf. Accessed June 30, 2017.
 
6. Thornton R, Cordell RF, Edmonds KE. Humanitarian aid operations in Republica Srpska during Operation Resolute 
2. J R Army Med Corps. 1997;143:141–145. doi:10. 1136/jramc-143-03-02.
 
7. Jenkins I. The changing world of military health care. J R Army Med Corps. 2004;150:234–238. doi:10. 1136/jramc-150-04-02.
 
8. Bricknell MCM. Reflections on medical aspects of ISAF IX in Afghanistan. J R Army Med Corps. 2007;153:44–51. 
doi:10. 1136/jramc-153-01-11.
 
9. General Principles Guiding the Treatment of Wounds of War: Conclusions Adopted by the Inter-Allied Surgical Conference Held 
in Paris, March and May, 1917. London, England: HMSO; 1917.
Figure 13-3. Medical planning for Operation Hamkari, Kandahar, 
Afghanistan, 2010. UK, US, Canadian, Afghan army, and Afghan 
public health representatives are collaborating.
201
Combined Health Services Support Operations
 10. MacNalty AS, ed. Medical Services in War. The Principal Medical Lessons of the Second World War. London, England: 
HMSO; 1968.
 11. UK Ministry of Defence. Foundations of medical support. In: Allied Joint Medical Support Doctrine. London, England; 
Ministry of Defence; 2015: Chap 1. AJP 4. 10 (B).
 12. Coalition Health Interoperability Handbook. 2nd ed. Ft Sam Houston, TX: Army Medical Department Center and School; 
2009. Quadripartite Advisory Publication 82.
 13. United Nations. Medical Support Manual for United Nations Field Missions. 3rd ed. New York, NY: UN; 2015. http://dag.
un.org/handle/11176/387299?show=full. Accessed June 30, 2017. 
 14. UK Ministry of Defence. Multinationality and medical support structures. In: Allied Joint Medical Support Doctrine. 
London, England; Ministry of Defence; 2015: Chap 10. AJP 4. 10 (B). 
 15. Mahoney PF, Hodgetts TJ, Hicks I. The deployed medical director. J R Army Med Corps. 2011;157(3 Suppl 1):S350–S356.
 16. Bernthal EMM, Russell RJ, Draper HJA. A qualitative study of the use of the four quadrant approach to assist ethical 
decision-making during deployment. J R Army Med Corps. 2014;160:196–202. doi:10. 1136/jramc-2013-000214.
 17. Cordell RF. Multinational medical support to operations: challenges, benefits and recommendations for the future. J 
R Army Med Corps. 2012;158:22–28. doi:10. 1136/jramc-158-01-06.
202
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
