313
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
Chapter 22
ENVIRONMENTAL EXTREMES: HEAT 
AND COLD
FRANCIS G. O’CONNOR, MD, MPH*; RICHARD A. SCHEURING, DO, MS†; and PATRICIA A. DEUSTER, PhD, MPH‡
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
MILITARY HISTORY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
MILITARY APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY
Heat
Cold
HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES FOR EXTREME 
ENVIRONMENTS
Heat Strategies
Cold Strategies
HEAT AND COLD STRESS AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
Role of the Military Medical Officer
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
MILITARY RESOURCES
SUMMARY
*Colonel (Retired), US Army Medical Corps; Professor and former Department Chair, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
†Colonel, US Army Reserve Medical Corps; Associate Professor, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
‡Professor and Director, Consortium for Health and Military Performance (CHAMP), Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, 
Maryland
314
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
of heat and cold exposures as applied to today’s warfighter; the focus is on enhancing performance in these 
settings. Specifically discussed are core definitions 
applied to these stressors, relevant military history 
and epidemiology, applicable applied physiology, and 
detailed prevention strategies. Specific guidance and 
resources are provided to assist the MMO in identifying and preventing the consequences of environmental 
stress experienced by combatants.
Service members on today’s battlefield confront a 
variety of environmental challenges, particularly with 
the emergence of unconventional, asymmetric, and 
hybrid warfare. Knowledge of these environmental 
challenges, as well as strategies to mitigate against the 
stressors that impact optimal performance and provide 
an advantage against enemy combatants, are essential 
for the military medical officer (MMO). This chapter 
specifically addresses the environmental challenges 
DEFINITIONS
the MMO in interpreting relevant literature and established military doctrinal guidance. These definitions 
are followed by terms associated with common medical 
conditions and injuries in that particular environment. 
Common terminologies related to thermal challenges 
(heat and cold) that confront service members are presented in Exhibits 22-1 and 22-2. First, basic and specific 
applied physiologic definitions are provided to assist 
MILITARY HISTORY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY 
Extremes of both heat and cold have always plagued 
soldiers. 1–3 Old Testament authors documented the 
health risks of wearing heavy body armor in the heat, 
noting, “when the sun stands still in the heavens,” it 
helps the Hebrews fight the more heavily armored 
Canaanites. In 400 bce, in one of the first reliable reports 
on the effect of heat in military operations, Herodotus 
described the effects of load carriage, protective clothing, and heat stress during an Athenian and Spartan 
conflict as both armies were worn out by the “thirst 
of the sun.” In 325 bce, while returning home from 
his conquests, Alexander the Great and 40,000 troops 
were exposed to 2 months of extreme heat and inadequate water. The army arrived home with only 5,000 
soldiers remaining. Hannibal lost nearly half his army 
from cold injury while crossing the Alps from Spain 
in 153 bce. The Roman legionary had knowledge of 
heat illness and associated risk factors, including load 
carriage, and instituted mitigation strategies: headgear 
included the capability to insert rushes in the helmet, 
which were kept wet with water, and noncombatant 
auxiliaries were utilized to carry supplies and weapons 
to preserve the legionnaires’ strength for fighting. 
The principal of heat acclimatization became apparent during the Middle Ages when English King 
Edward’s heavily armored crusaders were defeated 
by lighter Arab horsemen in one of the final battles of 
the Crusades; the English loss was attributed to the 
advantage the native Arabs had by living regularly in 
the heat. 1 Military environmental casualties and loss 
of troop effectiveness have remained significant operational concerns in modern warfare; it is estimated that 
in the early period of World War II in the Pacific theater 
of operations, there were over 100 casualties from heat 
or illness for every combat casualty. In the European 
theater, between autumn 1944 and spring 1945, 46,000 
cases of cold weather injury were reported, and nearly 
10% of all injuries were secondary to cold exposure. 1,2
Currently, the Armed Forces Health Surveillance 
Center publishes the Medical Surveillance Monthly 
Report, an important document for all MMOs to be 
familiar with. The report regularly provides critical 
insight into disease trends in the US military. Table 22-1 
presents patterns of heat and cold injuries from 2010 
through 2014. Clearly, cold injuries were less common 
than heat injuries during these years. 4,5
Unfortunately, recent efforts to mitigate exertional 
heat stroke casualties have not reduced injury rates. 
The annual rate (unadjusted) of cases of heat stroke in 
2014 was slightly higher than in 2013 and similar to 
rates in 2011 and 2012. In 2014, the incidence of heat 
stroke was highest among males and service members 
younger than 20 years of age, Asian/Pacific Islanders, 
Marine Corps and Army members, recruit trainees, 
and combat-specific occupations. Heat stroke rates in 
the Marine Corps were 50% higher than in the Army, 
and Army heat injury rates were more than 9-fold 
those in the other two services. The incidence was 86% 
higher among males than females. 
The rate of cold injuries was higher in 2014 than 
previous years, despite robust training, doctrine, 
procedures, and protective equipment and clothing to 
counter the threat from cold exposure. The Army and 
Marine Corps accounted for most of the increase in 
cold injuries from the year before, and like heat injury, 
the rate was highest among those under 20 years of 
315
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
EXHIBIT 22-1 
HEAT AND COLD APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY TERMINOLOGY
General Thermoregulation Terms
 
• Acclimation. Physiological adaptations to environmental stress that occurs through experimentally induced 
stressors, eg, exercising in a hot or cold chamber. 
 • Acclimatization. Physiological adaptations to the environmental stress that occur from natural environmental 
stressors, eg, exercising in a hot and humid, or cold and wet, environment.
 • Habituation. The diminishing of a physiological response to a frequently repeated stimulus, eg, repeated 
cold exposure leads to blunted shivering and decreased cold-induced vasoconstriction.
 • Conduction. Direct heat transfer to an adjacent, cooler object. 
 • Convection. Transfer of heat to a gas or liquid moving over the body. Heat transfer occurs when the gas or 
liquid is colder than the body. Convective heat loss by water can be large because the convective heat transfer 
coefficient of water is 25 times more than air.
 • Evaporation. Occurs when water from eccrine sweat glands vaporizes from the skin. Evaporation is an effective mechanism for dissipating excess heat, associated with a heat loss of 580 kcals/L of sweat.
 • Radiation. Emission of electromagnetic heat waves; does not require direct contact or air motion.
 • Thermal balance equation. S = M – (±W) ± (R + C) ± K – E, where S = rate of body heat storage, M = rate of 
metabolic energy production, W = mechanical work of exercise, R + C = rate of radiant and convective energy 
exchange, K = rate of conduction, and E = rate of evaporative loss.
Heat Terms
 • Thermotolerance. Ability to compensate for heat stress and sustain work. Individuals who are unable to 
sustain heat and whose body temperatures rise faster than others in comparable conditions are heat intolerant. Heat intolerance can be congenital (eg, ectodermal dysplasia); functional (eg, lack of acclimatization); or 
acquired (eg, infection, prior heat stroke). 
 • Heat stress and strain (compensated and uncompensated). Heat stress refers to the environmental and host 
conditions that increase body temperature; heat strain is the physiological and psychological consequence 
of heat stress. Compensated heat stress occurs when heat gain and loss are balanced so that a steady state 
is reached and work can be maintained; uncompensated heat stress occurs when cooling requirements are 
exceeded, a steady state cannot be maintained, and physiologic fatigue results.
 • Wet bulb globe temperature (WGBT). An index developed by the military to calculate overall environmental 
heat load. The WBGT integrates radiant heat, ambient temperature, and relative humidity.
WBGT = 0. 1 × dry bulb temperature (ambient air temperature) + 0. 7 × 
 wet bulb temperature (relative humidity) + 0. 2 × globe temperature (radiant heat)
Cold Terms
 
• Cold stress. Environmental and/or personal conditions that tend to remove body heat and decrease body 
temperature. Cold stress is frequently measured by the wind chill temperature.
 
• Cold strain. Physiologic and/or psychological consequences of cold stress.
 
• Wind chill temperature. A quantity expressing the effective lowering of the air temperature caused by the 
wind, especially as it affects the rate of heat loss from an object or human body or as it is perceived by an 
exposed person.
 
• Hypothermia. A decline of 2°C or 3. 6°F in normal human core temperature (37°C or 98. 6°F).
 
• Rewarming (passive and active). Passive rewarming is preventing further heat loss. Active rewarming is 
applying an external or internal (core) source of heat.
 
• Rewarming shock. Vascular collapse during rewarming, secondary to depressed myocardium, vasodilation, 
and hypovolemia.
 
• After-drop. Further cooling of the body core after removal from cool environment; caused by cool blood 
from the periphery returning to the core.
316
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 22-2 
HEAT AND COLD INJURY TERMINOLOGY
Exertional Heat Illness 
 • Heat exhaustion. Characterized by the inability to maintain adequate cardiac output due to strenuous physical exercise and environmental heat stress. Other symptoms generally include difficulty 
continuing with exercise, core body temperature between 101° and 104°F (38. 3°–40. 0°C), possible 
dehydration, but no significant dysfunction of the central nervous system (eg, seizure, altered 
consciousness, persistent delirium). 
 • Heat injury. Characterized by evidence of hyperthermia and possible end organ damage, but without significant neurologic manifestations. Other symptoms generally include a core temperature 
from 104° to 105°F (40. 0°–40. 5°C); clinical and laboratory manifestations of metabolic acidosis, 
rhabdomyolysis, acute kidney injury, and liver failure; and the absence of neurologic findings.
 • Exertional heat stroke. A multisystem illness characterized by central nervous system dysfunction 
(encephalopathy) and additional organ and tissue damage (eg, acute kidney injury, liver injury, 
rhabdomyolysis), as well as a core temperature above 104°F (40°C) measured immediately following collapse during strenuous activity. Central nervous system dysfunction can manifest as a wide 
range of possible symptoms and signs, including disorientation, headache, irrational behavior, 
irritability, emotional instability, confusion, altered consciousness, coma, or seizure.
Cold Injury
 • Hypothermia. Defined as a body core temperature below 35. 0°C (95. 0°F). Symptoms depend 
on the temperature. In mild hypothermia, there is shivering and mental confusion. In moderate 
hypothermia, shivering stops and confusion increases. In severe hypothermia there may be paradoxical undressing, where a person removes their clothing, as well as an increased risk of the heart 
stopping. 
 
◦ Mild hypothermia: 90°F (32°C) – 95°F (35°C) 
 
◦ Moderate hypothermia: 82°F (28°C) – < 90°F (32°C) 
 
◦ Severe hypothermia: < 82°F (28°C).
 • Frostbite. Medical condition in which localized damage is caused to skin and other tissues due to 
freezing.
 • Trench foot. A nonfreezing medical condition caused by prolonged exposure of the feet to damp, 
unsanitary, and cold conditions.
TABLE 22-1
THERMAL INJURIES IN ACTIVE COMPONENT SERVICE MEMBERS, 2010–2014
 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
Type of Injury 
N 
Rate* 
N 
Rate* 
N 
Rate* 
N 
Rate* 
N 
Rate*
Heat stroke 
322 
2. 2 
361 
2. 6 
365 
2. 5 
324 
2. 3 
344 
2. 5
Other heat injuries 
2,562 
17. 8 
2,618 
18. 1 
2,293 
16. 1 
1,847 
13. 1 
1,683 
12. 2
Cold injuries 
534 
3. 8 
526 
3. 7 
432 
3. 1 
415 
3. 0 
617 
4. 5
*per 10,000 person-years
Data sources: (1) Update: heat injuries, active component, US armed forces, 2014. MSMR. 2015;22(3):17–20. (2) Nagarajan S. Update: cold 
weather injuries, active and reserve components, US armed forces, July 2010–June 2015. MSMR. 2015;22(2):7–12.
317
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
age. In contrast, cold injuries were higher in females 
than in males across the 5-year period, for reasons that 
are not completely understood. Since then, increased 
efforts in training, equipment, and education among 
the troops have still not resulted in reduced injury rates 
due to cold exposure. 5
MILITARY APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY
Human performance is compromised by extremes 
of temperature, as well as depth and increased altitudes 
above sea level. Work efficiency can be reduced at all 
extremes, and efficiency must be considered in any 
temperature, altitude, flight, or undersea mission. Understanding the basic principles of applied physiology that 
contribute to these performance decrements are critical 
for the MMO, who is frequently called on for the proper 
interpretation of resources and guidelines that discuss 
environmental stress. Knowledge of physiology enables 
the MMO to identify and modify those factors that can 
be mitigated or leveraged for success in the operational 
environment, while promoting prevention by educating 
the individual warfighter as well as the unit leadership.
Heat 
Although the human body has remarkable resilience against cold, it can tolerate only minor temperature elevations (up to 9oF) without developing systemic 
dysfunction, which ultimately leads to multiorgan 
failure and death, if body temperature cannot be 
lowered. 6 Accordingly, the human body has multiple 
mechanisms to dissipate heat, including convection, 
conduction, radiation, and most importantly, evaporation (Figure 22-1). 
During exercise, the human body acts to dissipate 
the excess heat generated by skeletal muscle; this 
requires an intact cardiovascular system that uses 
blood to transfer heat from the body core to the skin, 
where the mechanisms for dissipating heat can take 
effect. However, when the ambient temperature is 
higher than the body’s core temperature, convection, 
conduction, and radiation are no longer effective. 
Environmental conditions also effect evaporative 
cooling. A water vapor pressure gradient must exist for sweat to evaporate and release heat into the 
environment. In high humidity (relative humidity 
>75%), evaporation becomes ineffective for transferring heat. Thus, in hot and humid conditions, 
service members become susceptible to exertional 
heat illness. 
Limitations on heat dissipation in hot and humid 
weather are exacerbated during intense exercise by a 
finite supply of blood that must fulfill multiple functions, including meeting the metabolic demands of 
active skeletal muscle and transporting heat to the 
skin surface for cooling. Further complicating matters is the dehydration that most individuals develop 
during intense exercise in the heat, which decreases 
plasma volume. Studies suggest that during intense 
exercise in the heat, for every 1% of body weight lost 
from dehydration, there is a concomitant increase 
in core body temperature of 0. 22°C (0. 4°F). 6 In other 
words, other factors being equal, a service member 
who loses only 1% of body weight from dehydration 
during intense exercise in the heat would be 1°C 
cooler compared to a buddy who loses 6% of body 
weight. This would equate to a temperature difference 
of approximately 39°C (102°F) versus 40°C (104°F) at 
the end of a training session. A number of additional 
factors influence the rate at which a person’s core 
body temperature rises during vigorous activity, 
including fitness level, degree of acclimatization to 
heat, clothing/equipment, use of certain types of nutritional supplements, and physiologic response (eg, 
degree of tachycardia). 
During exercise the body’s temperature becomes 
elevated in response to the increase in metabolic 
heat production; a modest rise in temperature is 
thought to represent a favorable adjustment that 
optimizes physiologic functions and facilitates 
heat loss mechanisms (as described in Figure 22-1). 
With compensated heat stress, the body achieves a 
new steady-state core temperature proportional to 
the increased metabolic rate and available means 
Figure 22-1. Physiological and environmental mechanisms 
of heat generation and dissipation. 
Solar radiation
Sky thermal radiation
Evaporation
(sweat)
Evaporation
(respiratory)
Convection
Metabolic
heat
Conduction
Radiation
Work
Air temperature
Air humidity
Reflected
solar
radiation
Ground
thermal
radiation
Ground
conduction
318
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
for dissipating heat. Studies in runners describe 
this mechanism as exercise-induced hyperthermia; 
runners have demonstrated that they can complete 
events successfully with significantly elevated core 
temperatures (103°–104°F) and remain entirely 
asymptomatic. 7 Uncompensated heat stress results 
when cooling capacity is exceeded and the service member or athlete cannot maintain a steady 
temperature. Continued exertion in the setting of 
uncompensated heat stress increases heat retention, 
causing a progressive rise in core body temperature 
and increasing the risk for severe heat illness.
Service members, unfortunately, do not always 
have time to properly acclimatize, and may encounter 
scenarios in which a failure to compensate may result 
in an exertional heat illness. Body temperature can 
increase through a number of mechanisms: exposure to 
environmental heat (impeded heat dissipation); physical exercise (increased heat production); fever from 
systemic illness (elevated set point with subsequent 
activation of shivering); and medications that may 
cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome and malignant 
hyperthermia. 
Importantly, febrile persons have accentuated 
elevations in core temperature when exposed to 
high ambient temperature, physical exercise, or both. 
Environmental temperature and humidity, medication, and exercise heat stress in turn challenge the 
cardiovascular system to provide high blood flow 
to the skin, where blood pools in warm, compliant 
vessels such as those found in the extremities. When 
blood flow is diverted to the skin, reduced perfusion of the intestines and other viscera can result 
in ischemia, endotoxemia, and oxidative stress. 8 
In addition, excessively high tissue temperatures 
can produce direct tissue injury (heat shock: >41°C 
[105. 8°F]). 
The magnitude and duration of heat shock 
influences whether cells respond by adaptation 
(acquired thermal tolerance), injury, or death 
(apoptotic or necrotic). Heat shock, ischemia, and 
systemic inflammatory responses can result in cellular dysfunction, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and multiorgan dysfunction syndrome. 
In addition, reduced cerebral blood flow, combined 
with abnormal local metabolism and coagulopathy, 
can lead to dysfunction of the central nervous system. This situation is an example of uncompensated 
heat stress, which can severely denigrate a service 
member’s performance, put the individual at risk 
for significant morbidity and mortality, and compromise the unit’s mission.
Cold
As previously stated, the human body is much more 
resilient against cold and lowered changes in temperature than heat. Despite this hardiness, cold exposure 
can significantly impact warfighter performance, and 
ultimately the completion of the mission. The principles of heat exchange discussed above remain the 
same; however, the MMO must be aware of several 
additional factors related to cold. 
Convection becomes critically important when 
service members lose significant amounts of heat 
in windy environments in the absence of protective 
clothing; the wind chill temperature calculation factors convective heat loss into risk. Convective loss 
can become even more important when soldiers are 
exposed to cold water because the convective heat 
transfer coefficient of water is about 25 times greater 
than that of air. 9 Radiant heat loss can become an issue as the sun goes down and service members are 
exposed to a clear night sky. Conductive heat loss can 
be a concern with soldiers sleeping on cold ground 
or snow; heat loss can become even more magnified 
if clothing is wet. Non-evaporative sweat in cold 
weather can also lead to wet clothing, decreasing its 
insulation capacity. 
Heat conservation is supplemented by mechanisms 
to increase heat production. Cold exposure leads to 
an increase in metabolic heat production, which can 
help offset heat loss. Body temperature is normally 
regulated through two parallel processes: behavioral 
temperature regulation and physiologic temperature 
EFFECTS OF COLD
EFFECTS OF HEAT
37° C
36° C
32° C
28° C
34° C
31° C
Figure 22-2. Effects of cold exposure on heat conservation 
(left) and heat dissipation (right).
319
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
regulation. Behavioral thermoregulation includes 
reducing direct cold exposure using clothing or 
protective shelter, and increasing physical activity. 
Unfortunately, mission requirements may prevent 
these actions, causing service members to rely on the 
physiologic mechanisms of peripheral vasoconstriction and shivering to preserve body heat. Shivering 
can be sustained longer than exercise, but exercise 
results in twice the rate of heat production. Shivering 
does come with a metabolic cost with an increase in 
oxygen uptake.
Heat conservation through peripheral vasoconstriction is the principal physiologic mechanism utilized 
to mitigate cold stress (Figure 22-2). The resulting 
decrease in peripheral blood flow reduces convective 
heat transfer from the body’s core to the shell (skin, 
subcutaneous fat, and muscle). This vasoconstrictor 
response results in a lower skin temperature while 
preserving the body’s core temperature. The vascular shunting of blood from the skin and limbs to the 
vital organs, while defending the core temperature, 
can paradoxically contribute to the etiology of coldinduced injuries.
Multiple individual factors can contribute to modifying the physiologic response to cold. 9 Individuals 
with a high body surface area to mass ratio (ectomorphs) lose more body heat than those with lower 
body surface area to mass ratios (endomorphs). Gender 
and ethnicity have been demonstrated to be risk factors 
as well. Females and African Americans have twice the 
rate of cold injury, which may be secondary to long, 
slender fingers and a greater body surface area to 
mass ratio. Fitness and training, which are significant 
risk factors for heat injury, do not have an effect on 
cold temperature regulation. However, fatigue is an 
important militarily relevant risk factor for cold injury 
and can impair both peripheral vasoconstriction and 
shivering. Finally, inadequate nutrition can be a key 
contributor to a risk for cold injury because hypoglycemia can impair the shivering response.
HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES FOR EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
Primary prevention is the cornerstone to optimizing 
human performance in extreme environments. This 
section discusses military relevant human performance 
optimization strategies to assist in preventing injury 
and optimizing performance among service members. 
Table 22-2 lists evidence-based strategies, including 
the targeted risk factor, to optimize warfighter performance in environmental extremes.
Heat Strategies
Tolerance of extreme heat and humidity depends 
upon a number of functional, acquired, and congenital 
factors, the most important of which is acclimatization 
(Table 22-3). 10 Acclimatization is the body’s ability to 
improve its response to and tolerance of heat stress 
over time. Thus, allowing sufficient time and using 
TABLE 22-2
HUMAN PERFORMANCE STRATEGIES TO MITIGATE HEAT AND COLD INJURY
Environment Performance Risk Factor or Challenge Strategy
Heat 
Lack of heat acclimatization 
Acclimatization strategy (TB MED 507/Air Force Pamphlet 
48-152, Heat Stress Control and Heat Casualty Management)
Heat 
Lack of aerobic fitness 
Improve aerobic fitness (FM 7-22, Army Physical Readiness 
Training) 
Heat 
Mismatch of hydration and work/rest 
Institution of appropriate work, rest, and hydration guidance 
(Army Institute of Environmental Medicine/Army Public 
Health Center work/rest and water consumption table, 
Table 22-4)
Cold 
Lack of cold weather acclimatization 
Acclimatization/habituation strategy
 
 
(Army TB MED 508, Prevention and Management of Cold Weather 
Injuries)
Cold 
Inappropriate environmental clothing 
Appropriate clothing
 
 
(Army TB MED 508, Prevention and Management of Cold Weather 
Injuries)
320
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
optimal training strategies that enable service members 
to acclimatize is critical for improving performance 
and mitigating the risk for exertional heat illness 
(EHI). Observational studies have found that the first 
week of training in high heat and humidity, for both 
service members and athletes, is the period of greatest 
risk for EHI. 6,11 Acclimatization requires at least 1 to 2 
weeks. However, any improved tolerance of heat stress 
generally dissipates within 2 to 3 weeks of returning 
to a more temperate environment. Acclimatization in 
warfighters is accomplished with a combination of 
environmental exposure with exercise; the Army/Air 
Force publication Heat Stress Control and Heat Casualty 
Management (TB MED 507/Air Force Pamphlet 48-152) 
details optimal acclimatization strategies. 6
The major physiologic adjustments that occur during 
heat and humidity acclimatization include expanded 
plasma volume, improved cutaneous blood flow, lowered threshold for initiation of sweating, increased sweat 
output, lowered salt concentration in sweat, and lowered 
skin and core temperatures during a standard exercise. 12 
These adaptations allow for better dissipation of heat 
during exercise and limit increases in body temperature 
compared to service members who have not acclimatized. Exhibit 22-3 describes the known physiologic 
benefits of acclimatization. Table 22-4 details current 
guidance for ground units published by the US Army 
Institute of Environmental Medicine. 6 The table’s recommendations are based upon an assessment of the wet 
bulb globe temperature to determine the heat category.
Improving performance in the heat also leverages 
many proactive strategies to keep service members 
cool and mitigate the risk of heat illness. A strategy 
utilized in the military is “heat dumping,” in which 
heat is transferred to the environment using techniques 
such as cool mist showers. One novel intervention 
used in the military is the arm immersion cooling 
system (AICS) (Figure 22-3). The AICS is a simple, 
efficient method for facilitating body (core and skin) 
temperature cooling and reducing the risk of serious 
heat illness. The AICS takes advantage of the rapid rate 
of heat transfer from the skin directly into cool water 
(compared to transfer into evaporative sweat or air), 
and the large surface area to mass ratio of the forearms. 
Several studies have reported that hand and forearm 
immersion in cool (50°–68°F) water reduces core and 
skin temperature faster than a noncooling control, 
extends tolerance time, and increases total work time. 13
TABLE 22-3 
FACTORS UNDERLYING HEAT INTOLERANCE IN THE YOUNG ACTIVE POPULATION
Congenital 
Functional 
Acquired
Ectodermal dysplasia 
Low physical fitness 
Sweat gland dysfunction
Chronic idiopathic anhidrosis 
Lack of acclimatization 
Dehydration
 
Low work efficiency 
Infectious disease
 
Reduced skin area to body mass ratio 
X-ray irradiation
 
 
Drugs, supplements
 
 
Large scarred burn areas
 
 
Previous heat stroke
EXHIBIT 22-3 
ACTIONS OF HEAT ACCLIMATIZATION
 • Thermal comfort: improved 
 • Exercise performance: improved
 • Core temperature: reduced 
 • Cardiovascular stability: improved
 • Heart rate: lowered
 • Stroke volume: increased
 • Blood pressure: better defended
 • Myocardial compliance: improved
 • Sweating: improved
 
◦ Earlier onset
 
◦ Higher rate
 
◦ Redistribution
 
◦ Hidromeiosis resistance 
 • Fluid balance: improved
 • Electrolyte loss: reduced
 • Skin blood flow: improved
 
◦ Earlier onset
 
◦ Higher rate 
 • Total body water: increased
 • Metabolic rate: lowered 
 • Plasma volume: increased and better 
defended
321
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
Cold Strategies
Although service members can successfully leverage acclimatization as a strategy to prevent heat illness, 
strategies for acclimatization are not as well developed 
as a protective mechanism to combat cold stress. Cold 
acclimatization manifests in three different patterns of 
thermoregulatory adjustments: habituation, metabolic 
acclimatization, and insulative acclimatization. Habituation involves the blunting of both shivering and coldinduced vasoconstriction with prolonged exposure. 
Studies have demonstrated that short, intense cold exposures (<1 hour) several times a week for 2 to 3 weeks 
can stimulate a habituation response. 9 Metabolic acclimatization involves an exaggerated shivering response, 
while insulative acclimatization involves enhanced heat 
conservation methods. With insulative acclimatization, 
cold exposure elicits a more rapid and more pronounced 
decline in skin temperature and lower thermal conductance at the skin than in the unacclimatized state. 
Because acclimatization is not an optimal strategy 
to mitigate cold stress, other strategies to combat 
cold stress injuries and optimize performance must 
be considered. Selected strategies involve avoidance, 
appropriate work/rest cycles, and suitable clothing. 
Cold-weather clothing is specifically designed to 
protect against hypothermia by reducing heat loss to 
the environment (Figure 22-4). Protective insulation 
is determined by how much air is effectively trapped 
by clothing. Service members require clothing that 
can accommodate a range of ambient temperatures 
and physical activity levels, and that can protect 
against wind, rain, and snow. This is accomplished 
by following two important concepts when dressing 
for activities in the cold: layering and staying dry. 
Multiple layers of clothing allow air to be trapped 
to serve as insulation, and allow the individual to 
adjust layers according to environmental conditions 
and activity level. Layers can be removed as the ambient temperature or physical activity levels increase, 
TABLE 22-4
WORK/REST AND WATER CONSUMPTION TABLE
Table courtesy of the US Army Institute of Environmental Medicine and US Army Public Health Center.
322
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
thereby reducing sweating and moisture buildup 
within clothing. The Army publication Prevention and 
Management of Cold Weather Injuries (TB MED 508)9 is 
an excellent resource that details the practical prevention of cold weather injuries through the appropriate 
selection of clothing. 
Figure 22-4. Generation III Extended Cold Weather Clothing 
System. Provides soldiers a multi-layered, versatile insulating system adaptable to varying operational and environmental conditions. March 2, 2010. Army Program Executive 
Office (PEO) Soldier photo.
Reproduced from: https://www.flickr.com/photos/
peosoldier/4777344669/.
Figure 22-3. Arm immersion cooling system. 
HEAT AND COLD STRESS AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
Role of the Military Medical Officer
MMOs are expected to have scientific background 
in the physiology of extreme environments, as well as 
the medical knowledge to provide recommendations 
for prevention of environmental injuries, to assist in 
the treatment of such injuries, and to make return-toduty determinations when restriction from activity or 
deployment may be essential. Above all, the best treatment strategy for all potential environmental injuries 
or illness is primary prevention. In addition to leveraging acclimatization, the MMO must be proactive 
in assessing environmental stress and implementing 
appropriate work/rest and hydration strategies.
The services systematically approach risk management for environmental stress comparably to approaches for other stresses, utilizing a series of steps. 14 The five 
steps of risk management—identify the hazards, assess 
the hazards, develop controls and make risk decisions, 
implement controls, and supervise and evaluate—are 
used across the services to help them operate as a joint 
force and optimize readiness (Figure 22-5). 
When leadership identifies an environmental 
risk of EHI, the risk management process is carefully planned to assess the risk and implement 
1.
1.
1.
Identify the hazards
2.
Assess the hazards
3.
Develop controls and
make risk decisions
4.
Implement controls
5.
Supervise and
evaluate
Figure 22-5. The Army risk management process. 
mitigation strategies. Activities implemented to 
reduce risk include those previously discussed: 
education, acclimatization, appropriate adjustment 
of activities to include work/rest and hydration 
strategies, and being prepared for early EHI management. Depending upon the degree of assessed 
risk, leaders of increasing rank are required to 
review and approve training plans. Arguably the 
323
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
military’s most important tool in preventing EHI is 
leadership; all leaders are expected to proactively 
implement preventive measures to mitigate the 
threat of heat casualties. 
To mitigate the consequences of cold exposure, the 
MMO should know that physiologic acclimatization 
to cold stress can occur, but it is generally considered 
modest at best, and requires more time to develop 
and is less practical than heat acclimatization. MMOs 
must review all possible techniques and strategies to 
minimize cold injuries.
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
Ultimately, MMOs serve in support of the commanding officer, and they must remain aware of issues related to environmental conditions. Developing 
credibility and trust are key; without them, an MMO 
will be less effective in mitigating environmental risks. 
Being aware of individual service member needs, having access to resources for finding new strategies, and 
identifying realistic countermeasures are important 
for success. 
MILITARY RESOURCES
General
 
• The Medical Surveillance Monthly Report 
(https://www.afhsc.mil/Search/SearchMSMR) 
provides evidence-based estimates of the 
incidence, distribution, impact, and trends of 
illnesses in service members and associated 
populations. Annual reports are published on 
topics such as environmental illnesses, which 
allow for comparisons of prior year data and 
assessment of preventive strategies.
Heat
 
• The US Army Public Health Command Heat 
Injury Prevention website (http://phc.amedd.
army.mil/topics/discond/hipss/Pages/HeatInjuryPrevention.aspx) provides heat casualty prevention information such as the Composite 
Risk Management for Heat Injury Prevention, 
Identification, and Response, FY 2010. 
 
• The US Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (http://www.usariem.army.mil/) 
has additional resources such as the Ranger & 
Airborne School Students Heat Acclimatization Guide. 
 
• Commanders and healthcare providers in the 
Army and Air Force should use TB MED 507/
Air Force Pamphlet 48-152, Heat Stress Control 
and Heat Casualty Management,6 to develop a 
comprehensive heat illness prevention program. This program should be complemented 
with Army risk management doctrine, as detailed in FM 5-19, Composite Risk Management. 
These documents provide the framework 
for early recognition of climatic injuries and 
implementation of preventive measures. 
 
• The US Army Training and Doctrine Command has published regulations providing 
guidance to commanders for prevention of 
heat casualties in TRADOC Regulation 35029, Prevention of Heat and Cold Casualties (http://
www.tradoc.army.mil/tpubs/regs/tr350-29.pdf).
 
• Navy medical personnel can find guidance 
on the management of exertional heat illness 
published by the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Current policy is identified in Technical 
Manual NEHC-TM-OEM 6260. 6A, Prevention 
and Treatment of heat and Cold Stress Injuries 
(http://www.med.navy.mil/sites/nmcphc/Documents/policy-and-instruction/oem-prevention-andtreatment-of-heat-and-cold-stress-injuries.pdf).
Cold
 
• Cold Injury Prevention (Army Public Health Center [Provisional] webpage: https://phc.amedd.
army.mil/Pages/default.aspx).
 
• Army TB MED 508, Prevention and Management of Cold Weather Injuries,9 a quintessential 
military resource detailing guidance on cold 
injury, was published in 2005 and supersedes 
TB MED 81/NAVMED P-5052-29/AFP 161-11, 
30 September 1976.
SUMMARY
This chapter has introduced the basics of optimizing service member performance in hot or 
cold operational settings. Specifically, the historical 
relevance of the environment to success in military 
operations, the basic applied physiology relevant to 
understanding the warfighter in the environment, 
and evidence-based strategies demonstrated to preserve performance in environmental extremes are 
discussed. The MMO operates in a unique setting 
with limited resources, where urgency and proper 
324
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
planning can mark the difference between success and 
failure on the battlefield. It is important to remember 
that MMOs serve not just to treat wounded, but also 
to provide guidance to the commanding officer to 
optimize the unit’s performance and ultimately support mission success. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Goldman RF. Introduction to heat-related problems in military operations. In: Wenger CB, ed. Medical Aspects of Harsh 
Environments. Vol 1. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2001: 3–49.
 
2. McCallum JE. Military Medicine: From Ancient Times to the 21st Century. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, Inc; 2008.
 
3. Gabriel RA. Between Flesh and Steel: A History of Military Medicine from the Middle Ages to the War in Afghanistan. Washington, DC: Potomac Books; 2013.
 
4. Update: heat injuries, active component, US armed forces, 2014. MSMR. 2015;22(3):17–20.
 
5. Nagarajan S. Update: cold weather injuries, active and reserve components, US armed forces, July 2010–June 2015. 
MSMR. 2015;22(2):7–12.
 
6. US Department of Defense. Heat Stress Control and Heat Casualty Management. Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department of the Army and Air Force, March 2003. Army Technical Bulletin Medical 507/Air Force Pamphlet 48-152.
 
7. Ely BR, Ely MR, Cheuvront SN, Kenefick RW, Degroot DW, Montain SJ. Evidence against a 40 degrees C core temperature threshold for fatigue in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009;107(5):1519–1525.
 
8. Bouchama A, Knochel JP. Heat stroke. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(25):1978–1988.
 
9. US Department of the Army. Prevention and Management of Cold Weather Injuries. Washington, DC: Headquarters, DA; 
April 2005. Army Technical Bulletin Medical 508.
 10. Epstein Y. Heat intolerance: predisposing factor or residual injury? Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1990;22(1):29–35.
 11. Casa DJ, Armstrong LE, Ganio MS, Yeargin SW. Exertional heat stroke in competitive athletes. Curr Sports Med Rep. 
2005;4(6):309–317.
 12. Glaser EM. Acclimatization to heat and cold. J Physiol. Dec 1949;110(3-4):330–337.
 13. DeGroot DW, Kenefick RW, Sawka MN. Impact of arm immersion cooling during Ranger training on exertional heat 
illness and treatment costs. Mil Med. 2015;180(11):1178–1183.
 14. US Department of the Army. Risk Management. Washington, DC: Headquarters, DA; April 2014. Army Techniques 
Publication 5-19.
