555
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
Chapter 36
ACUTE PAIN MANAGEMENT IN THE 
DEPLOYED ENVIRONMENT
CHESTER “TRIP” BUCKENMAIER III, MD*
INTRODUCTION
HISTORY OF MILITARY PAIN MANAGEMENT
PAIN “CHRONIFICATION” AND THE POLYTRAUMA TRIAD
THE ACUTE PAIN SERVICE
PAIN MANAGEMENT ON THE MODERN BATTLEFIELD
Role 1: Immediate First Aid Delivered at the Scene
Role 2: Forward Surgical Care
Role 3: Combat Support Hospitals
Roles 4 and 5: Medical Centers Outside the Theater
PAIN MEASUREMENT
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army; Professor of Anesthesiology, Department of Military Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University, 
Rockville, Maryland
556
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
“What an infinite blessing.”
—General Thomas Jonathan “Stonewall” Jackson (1824–1863)
General “Stonewall” Jackson and his Confederate 
army were in the process of routing the Union army 
during the Civil War battle of Chancellorsville, Virginia, on May 2, 1863, but he had run out of time and 
daylight for the attack. The general and his staff were 
riding in front of Confederate lines, reconnoitering 
the situation in hopes of pressing an evening attack 
to break the Union lines, when Confederate sentries 
mistook the scouting party for the enemy and opened 
fire with muskets. General Jackson was wounded in 
the left arm and right hand. He was removed from the 
battlefield by a horse-drawn field ambulance, receiving 
whiskey to ease the pain of his wounds. He was taken 
to the Confederate II Corps field hospital of Dr Hunter 
McGuire, where more whiskey was provided and 
morphine administered to further ease the general’s 
suffering. Early the following morning, Dr McGuire 
performed a left arm amputation while the general 
was anesthetized with chloroform. As the effects of the 
anesthetic took hold, the general was reported to have 
murmured, “What an infinite blessing.”1
General Jackson was most likely referring to the 
“blessing” of battlefield pain relief following his 
wounding. Contrary to popular cinematic depictions 
of Civil War medicine that suggested soldiers suffered 
surgery with little or no analgesia, morphine was in 
fact widely available and often used to ease the suffering of wounded soldiers. Military physicians during 
the war were advised to carry morphine and brandy 
in their pockets as their primary medications for the 
management of casualties. 2 Then as now, those responsible for providing care to Americans defending 
this nation have sought innovative ways to ease the 
suffering of battle casualties. This chapter provides 
the foundation for the military medical officer (MMO) 
to successfully implement a pain management strategy for wounded service members in the deployed 
environment.
HISTORY OF MILITARY PAIN MANAGEMENT
The primary active compound in opium was first 
isolated by the German physicist Friedrich Sertürner 
in 1806, and the medication was given the name “morphine” after the Greek god Morpheus. The invention 
of the syringe and hollow needle followed soon after 
in the 1850s, providing a suitable delivery system for 
the drug and paving the way for its use as a surgical 
analgesic. 3 The combination of these two medical 
advances just prior to the American Civil War was 
fortuitous in light of the masses of battlefield casualties from this particularly brutal chapter in American 
military history. Before these advances, wounded 
soldiers requiring surgery had little hope of avoiding 
significant suffering under the knife of a surgeon. In 
the Revolutionary War medical text, Diseases Incident 
to Armies,4 John Ranby, a prominent English surgeon, 
is quoted:
In regard to the wounded, you should act in all respects as if you were entirely unaffected by their 
groans and complaints; but at the same time I would 
have you behave with such caution, as not to proceed 
rashly or cruelly, and be particularly careful to avoid 
unnecessary pain. 4 
In short, before the advent of the hypodermic 
needle and morphine, those wounded in America’s 
wars could hope for little more than a speedy surgeon willing to avoid unnecessary pain. Prior to the 
Civil War, anesthesia and analgesia for soldiers was 
at best rudimentary. The lack of adequate pain control served as a significant impediment to battlefield 
surgical development; operations were reserved for 
the direst of circumstances and the surgery was often 
as deadly as the inciting wound. As General Jackson 
so eloquently noted, the ability to manage the pain of 
combat wounds was indeed a blessing. The miracle of 
analgesia with morphine and other opioid medications 
was certainly a significant advancement in battlefield 
surgical management, although this therapy would 
prove to have a decidedly unhealthy side. Serious 
consequences associated with chronic opioid use for 
pain were recognized following the Civil War. In their 
1928 book, The Opium Problem, Terry and Pellens noted 
that “following the Civil War the increase in opiate use 
was so marked among ex-soldiers as to give rise to the 
term ‘army disease,’ and today in more than one old 
soldiers’ home are cases of chronic opium intoxication 
which date from this period.”5 It has been suggested 
that the widespread use of morphine, during and long 
after the Civil War, gave rise to the first large-scale 
drug addiction problem within the United States. 
Spikes in drug abuse have followed every major US 
conflict since. 2
Interestingly, the Civil War provided some classic 
descriptions of chronic pain conditions, such as “phantom limb pain” and “causalgia” (termed “complex 
557
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
regional pain syndrome” today). S. Weir Mitchell, a 
neurologist, insisted his patients had a form of physical 
illness, manifested by the strange pain behaviors noted 
above, that seemed to persist long after their wounds 
had healed. Unfortunately, this viewpoint changed by 
the 1920s with the development of “specificity theory,” 
which postulated the experience of pain had to be associated with a specific noxious stimulus. Pain sufferers 
who did not meet these strict criteria were presumed 
to be malingerers or drug abusers. 6 At this point, morphine was highly regulated, and chronic pain patients 
were often limited to psychotherapy or neurosurgical 
procedures (resection or ablation of nerves) with poor 
and often debilitating results. 6
Although attitudes regarding the treatment of 
acute and chronic pain continued to evolve, morphine 
remained the gold standard for battlefield analgesia 
during World War II. Henry K. Beecher, an anesthesiologist in the US Army who served in the North African and Italian campaigns, provided the first wartime 
clinical investigations specifically on the issue of pain 
from battlefield wounds. 7 Dr Beecher made several salient observations related to morphine use at the point 
of battlefield injury, during initial casualty care, and its 
impact on casualty outcomes. First, Beecher noted that 
at the point of injury, medics routinely administered 
morphine prophylactically, versus the administration 
after an assessment of a casualty’s actual complaint of 
pain. Beecher noted that this approach might adversely 
impact casualties as their treatment continued, particularly those who were hypovolemic. He observed 
that intramuscular injection of morphine in patients 
with low blood pressure from wounding often failed 
to decrease pain, prompting additional dosages. 
When the patient was eventually warmed and normal 
circulation reestablished at the field hospital, the unabsorbed deposits of morphine in the muscle entered 
the circulation, resulting in morphine toxicity. Furthermore, while advocating for the more responsible 
use of morphine on the battlefield, Beecher developed 
the first concept of multimodal pain management in 
battlefield casualties by recognizing the importance of 
regional nerve blocks, proper splinting and bandaging, 
and emotional care as all being important components 
of pain management in the wounded. 
As World War II ended, a young anesthesiologist 
named John Bonica was struggling to run an anesthesia 
service at the newly built Madigan Army Hospital in 
Washington State. Bonica observed a growing number 
of returning soldiers with healed wounds but baffling 
“lesionless” chronic pain problems. He was astonished 
at the general lack of information on the management 
of these pain conditions either in the literature or from 
experienced colleagues in other medical specialties. Dr 
Bonica took it upon himself to read anything he could 
find on chronic pain and instituted regular meetings 
with colleagues to discuss the management of pain 
patients. 8 This postwar experience thoroughly convinced Dr Bonica that complex pain problems required 
a coordinated, multidisciplinary approach, which 
later led to his establishment of the first pain clinic at 
the University of Washington, in 1961. 9 Dr Bonica is 
further credited with the first comprehensive textbook 
on pain management, The Management of Pain,10 now 
in its fourth edition. It would not be an overstatement 
to suggest that the modern practice of pain medicine 
was forged in the minds and experience of those caring 
for American war wounded. 
Although innovation in battlefield surgery and 
anesthesia progressed rapidly following World War 
II, scant attention was afforded casualties with pain 
on American battlefields beyond the provision of 
morphine. Prevailing attitudes considered acute pain 
a natural symptom of wounding that would be alleviated through appropriate management, healing, and 
rehabilitation. Perhaps this explains why the evolution of pain management on the American battlefield 
stalled with morphine, a solution from the Civil War. 
The recognition that acute pain influences the development of chronic pain is a relatively recent concept, and 
the mechanisms involved in the transition of acute to 
chronic pain, or “chronification” of pain (see below), 
remain poorly elucidated. 11 
At the onset of the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq 
following September 11, 2001, the American military 
deployed into a 21st century combat casualty care environment almost exclusively with morphine, a 19th 
century pain management solution. Although morphine maintained its historical reputation for treating 
combat trauma pain, it proved to be a poor fit given 
the recent evolution of modern patient evacuation 
capabilities and treatment doctrine. Previously, common practice had been to hold the wounded for days 
in theater until they were clinically stable for transport. 
Patients today are now being held only long enough 
to be stabilized for transport to the next node, or role, 
of higher medical treatment capability. During the 
Vietnam War, the average time from point of injury 
back to the United States was 45 days, whereas today 
the average time is only 4 days. 12 The rapid transition 
of casualties by evacuation aircraft to higher levels of 
medical capability has been considered a key factor 
in the historically low died-of-wounds rate, less than 
10%, established in Iraq and Afghanistan. 12 
While the improved aeromedical evacuation chain 
has been a remarkable success, it resulted in unexpected consequences in terms of pain management. 
Military aircraft used for casualty transport present dif558
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
ficult environments for administering pain care. Pain 
experienced from combat wounds tended to be exacerbated in the loud, vibrating, cramped, and bouncing 
interior of an aircraft in flight for extended distances 
(Figure 36-1). Aeromedical personnel, constrained early in the war to morphine for pain management, were 
significantly challenged by limitations in monitoring 
capability, space, and equipment. Managing respiratory complications associated with morphine in this 
environment can be life threatening; therefore, many 
patients arrived at their destination with inadequate 
pain control. 13 In 2003, the US Army surgeon general, 
Lieutenant General James Peake, called for innovative 
pain solutions to address a number of wounded soldiers reportedly arriving in Landstuhl, Germany, from 
Iraq and Afghanistan in “agony.” Peake’s directive 
resulted in the first deployment of medical personnel 
and equipment with the express mission of improving 
evacuation pain management. 14 
For some time prior to September 11, 2001, military 
anesthesia leaders had been considering an expanded 
role for regional anesthesia (RA) and local anesthetics 
on the modern battlefield. Although its utilization 
in civilian medicine was limited to several academic 
medical centers, recent RA advances with new needle 
and peripheral nerve catheter technology, peripheral 
nerve stimulation, and microprocessor-driven infusion pumps had enhanced the value of RA as a viable 
battlefield anesthetic and analgesic. Furthermore, 
the military’s use of RA was expanding for routine 
surgery in the United States, while military medical 
missions to underserved regions of the world were 
recognizing other benefits of RA. Specifically noted 
were improved patient hemodynamic stability, safety, 
small logistic and equipment support requirements, 
and profound perioperative analgesia, especially when 
continuous peripheral nerve block (CPNB) catheters 
were utilized. 15 
Based on the military’s initial experience with RA 
and a review of casualty data, initial efforts to improve 
casualty evacuation pain management were centered 
on bringing advanced RA to the modern battlefield. 
In a query of wound types in 3,102 casualties from 
October 2001 to January 2005, 54% were orthopedic 
extremity wounds recognized as particularly suited 
for RA and CPNB management. 16 
In 2003, the first CPNB was placed in an American 
casualty who had sustained extensive injury to his 
left calf from a rocket-propelled grenade (Figure 362). Despite intravenous administration of morphine 
sulfate, 18 mg titrated over 60 minutes, the patient 
complained of the highest level of pain on a verbal 
analog scale (10 out of 10) upon arrival at the 21st 
Combat Support Hospital (CSH) in Balad, Iraq. As 
part of his operating room anesthetic management, 
continuous left lumbar plexus and continuous sciatic nerve catheters were placed, reducing his pain to 
zero, and debridement of the wound was performed 
under light sedation with the patient spontaneously 
ventilating. Following this first operation, the patient 
traveled to Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, DC, via Landstuhl Regional Medical Center 
(LRMC), Germany, with the majority of his analgesic 
needs handled through continuous infusions of 0. 2% 
ropivacaine through the CPNB catheters. The CPNB 
catheters placed in the Iraq CSH were maintained for 
16 days and used to establish surgical level blocks for 
four additional operations. 14 This first experience led, 
within a few years, to routine use of RA and CPNB 
in Iraq and Afghanistan in hundreds of casualties. 
Although a complete description of RA and CPNB 
use on the battlefield is beyond the scope of this 
chapter, an excellent resource for understanding RA 
on the modern battlefield can be found in the Military 
Figure 36-1. Inside a C-17 Air Force medical evacuation flight 
from Afghanistan.
Figure 36-2. Typical wound managed with continuous peripheral nerve blocks at a combat support hospital.
559
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
Advanced Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia handbook, 
the first military medical text devoted to the acute pain 
management of battlefield casualties. 17 
RA, while transformational for the pain management of extremity wounds, is not appropriate for many 
other injuries that were left with morphine as the sole 
analgesic option. However, in the process of fielding 
RA in the evacuation system, the door was opened for 
an expanded evaluation of acute pain management 
across all roles of care. Medical officers from all three 
uniformed services, spurred by the need to improve 
pain care for the wounded, ill, and injured, began to 
work through their inter-service differences to develop 
a synchronized strategy to address pain management. This was fortunate because the general lack of 
historical attention to casualty pain management and 
the overreliance on morphine monotherapy for pain 
on the battlefield was contributing to later recuperation 
problems for service members and veterans at home 
as they continued their rehabilitation and recovery. 18
PAIN “CHRONIFICATION” AND THE POLYTRAUMA TRIAD
Although relief of pain and suffering following 
wounding has always been considered a noble act and 
ethically sound medical practice, pain has historically 
been understood to be an acute symptom of wounding 
or disease that would resolve as the casualty recovered and rehabilitated. Woolf19 proposed that pain be 
divided into two broad categories: adaptive and maladaptive. Adaptive pain is protective against injury, 
promotes survival when injury has occurred, and is 
self-limiting. Maladaptive pain, on the other hand, is a 
pathologic response by the nervous system to noxious 
stimuli and is a manifestation of pain as a disease. 
Only in the past few decades have physicians begun 
to understand that poorly managed acute pain (adaptive) can have a negative impact on recovery and lead 
to debilitating chronic pain (maladaptive). Evidence is 
mounting that endogenous and exogenous factors can 
influence pain signal descending pathway modulation 
within the spinal cord and possibly influence “chronification” of acute pain into chronic pain. 20 Individuals 
who exhibit symptoms consistent with pain chronification develop common brain changes in areas known 
to manage nociceptive input or pain regulation. It has 
been suggested that these brain changes represent a 
pain chronification signature that should be reversible with adequate pain management. 21 However, the 
myriad influences impacting the chronification of pain 
remain incompletely and poorly understood. Rollin 
Gallagher, MD, editor of Pain Medicine, has modeled 
the chronification of pain as a cycle that begins with 
acute injury and cascades into a series of pathological central nervous system aberrant changes. These 
changes can be mutually reinforcing in a vicious circle 
and lead to the disease process of chronic pain with its 
attendant physical, psychological, and social disability 
(Figure 36-3). 
The impact of pain chronification on a wounded 
service member’s recovery and rehabilitation is often 
devastating. Moreover, unlike the obvious disability associated with amputation, broken bones, and 
wounds that engender public sympathy, the burden 
of chronic pain is often invisible to the public; those 
carrying this burden often do so alone with little public or professional empathy. Development of chronic 
pain can further exacerbate other common wartime 
injuries such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
and traumatic brain injury (TBI), which are often described as signature injuries from the recent conflicts. 
Lew et al22 recently examined the medical records of 
340 consecutive veterans being treated for polytrauma 
to determine the incidence of chronic pain, PTSD, and 
TBI in this population. They noted that 81. 5% of this 
population complained of chronic pain (compared to 
68. 2% with PTSD and 66. 8% with TBI). Furthermore, 
41. 2% of the cohort had all three conditions simultaneously. This group suggested that the association of 
chronic pain, PTSD, and TBI represents a polytrauma 
clinical triad, and most patients diagnosed with one 
condition will have the others in combination. However, although considerable attention and investment 
has been directed towards PTSD and TBI research and 
treatment, comparatively little investment has been afforded chronic pain in the same period, even though it 
is the more common complaint among trauma victims. 
THE ACUTE PAIN SERVICE
The fact that opioids have historically served (and 
continue to serve) in the modern era as a cornerstone 
of pain management following combat wounds is 
understandable, because this class of medications has 
few peers in terms of the speed and intensity of the 
analgesia produced. As noted earlier, the use of this 
medication has had a long association with military 
medicine, and more severely wounded veterans are 
surviving than at any time in history. Unfortunately, 
the consequences of opioid monotherapy for pain 
management is becoming a problem as significant, and 
in many cases worse, than the pain condition being 
560
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
treated. Beyond the usual acute side effects of nausea, 
constipation, dependence, and potentially deadly respiratory depression, the use of opioids for protracted 
periods can lead to a host of other issues. Chronic 
opioid use has been associated with reductions in sex 
hormones in men, termed opioid-induced androgen 
deficiency (OPIAD), that can result in significantly 
higher levels of depression, fatigue, and sexual dysfunction. 23 Other conditions associated with long-term 
opioid use include osteoporosis, immune function 
suppression, and cognitive impairment. 24 
Obviously these conditions significantly detract 
from the recovery and rehabilitation of a casualty 
from combat trauma. Even more disconcerting is the 
mounting evidence that ongoing use of opioids for 
pain may paradoxically decrease the threshold for a 
patient’s tolerance of noxious stimuli. Although the 
exact mechanism for this phenomenon is incompletely 
understood, it is likely a combination of both peripheral and central nervous system changes influenced 
by chronic opioid therapy. 24,25 Mirroring the national 
opioid misuse and abuse trends, the military has experienced an increase in opioid-related problems that 
have likely been magnified by the stress associated 
with the last 18 years of conflict. 26 The medical community’s continued overreliance on opioids as a single 
approach for managing pain has created an epidemic 
of prescription medication abuse and diversion within 
Pathophysiology of Maintenance
• Radiculopathy
• Neuroma traction
• Myofascial sensitization
• Brain and spinal cord pathology
 leading to atrophy, reorganization
Neuropsychopathology of Maintenance
• Encoded anxiety dysregulation
• Posttraumatic stress disorder
• Emotional allodynia
• Mood disorder
• Cognitive disorder
Pathology
• Muscular atrophy and 
 weakness
• Bone loss
• Immunocompromise
• Depression
Disability
• Less active
• Kinesophobia
• Decreased motivation
• Increased isolation
• Role loss
• Sleep disorder
Acute Injury and Pain
Neurogenic Inflammation
• Glial activation
• Pro-inflammatory cytokines
• Blood-nerve barrier disruption
Central Sensitization
• Neuroplastic changes
Peripheral Sensitization
• New Na+ channels cause
 lower pain threshold
Chronification: The Chronic Pain Cycle
Figure 36-3. “Chronification”: the chronic pain cycle.
Reproduced with permission from: Gallagher RM. Pharmacologic approaches to pain management. In: Ebert M, Kerns R, 
eds. Behavioral and Psychoparmacologic Pain Management. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2011:139.
561
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
the United States. In 2009, the rate of deaths due to 
unintentional drug overdoses surpassed those caused 
by motor vehicle crashes. 27 
As evidence has become increasingly unfavorable 
toward opioid monotherapy on the battlefield, coupled 
with recent successes in managing complex trauma with 
CPNB and local anesthetics, the need for a systematic 
approach to pain for casualty evacuation has become 
more apparent. While CPNB catheters have clearly demonstrated efficacy in the management of polytrauma 
pain without the significant side effects associated 
with opioids, RA techniques and other advanced pain 
management options require trained medical personnel 
and logistics support at all roles of care in the evacuation chain. 28 Fortunately, as chronification of acute pain 
increasingly became considered as a disease process, 
efforts in both military and civilian medicine began 
establishing acute pain management infrastructure 
through establishment of an acute pain service (APS). 
The APS provides the training, medical logistics, and 
organizational framework for physicians, nurses, and 
other support personnel to diagnose and treat acute 
pain as a pathophysiologic ailment. 29 Most importantly, 
the APS infrastructure facilitates the use of multimodal 
analgesia for patients based on their individual problems, within the context of increasingly complex pain 
issues associated with trauma and the modern perioperative environment. Multimodal analgesia is defined 
as the use of two or more medications or techniques 
that produce analgesia by different mechanisms. The 
advantage of this approach is that the overall analgesia 
is superior to what would have been achieved using 
any single drug or procedure (monotherapy), while 
the unwanted side effects of any one treatment element 
are minimized because of reduced reliance, and thus a 
smaller dose, of any one element. 30,31 
Concurrent with the improvements in managing 
acute pain through APS establishment in major US 
hospitals has been the realization that aggressive and 
effective acute pain management reduces postoperative morbidity. 32 Furthermore, effective control of acute 
pain reduces the cascade of unwanted physiologic 
consequences (see Figure 36-3) associated with unmanaged nociception, which adversely impact recovery 
and rehabilitation and can induce chronic pain. 33,34 
Persistent postsurgical pain, defined as pain lasting 3 
to 6 months after surgery, is present in 10% to 50% of 
surgical patients, and can lead to debilitating chronic 
pain in 2% to 10% of these patients. 35 
Despite this alarmingly high incidence, little is 
generally known or accepted on who is at risk for 
developing chronic pain following trauma or surgery, or how to effectively manage acute pain to 
avoid chronification. It is understood that acute pain 
chronification is a complex problem involving many 
patient factors in the perioperative and recovery 
periods that contribute to persistent postsurgical 
pain and, in some patients, chronic pain. 36 Certainly 
a patient’s genotype is an important determinant 
of susceptibility to chronic pain development, but 
epigenetic modifications of gene expression that are 
influenced by exposure to toxins, medications, diet, 
and other physiologic and psychologic stressors can 
also impact a patient’s unique predisposition to developing chronic pain after trauma or surgery. 37 This 
emerging understanding of the complexity and importance of effective pain management in a patient’s 
overall healing, along with the requirement to address 
the needs of the wounded, ill, and injured from the 
Afghanistan and Iraq wars, has led to a reemphasis 
on the management of pain in war casualties on 21st 
century battlefields. 
PAIN MANAGEMENT ON THE MODERN BATTLEFIELD
In 2009, following increasing reports of prescription medication abuse and diversion among the Army 
wounded assigned to the Warrior Transition Units, 
as well as continued concerns with the lack of a clear 
pain management strategy, the Army surgeon general, Lieutenant General Eric Schoomaker, chartered 
the Tri-Service Pain Management Task Force (PMTF). 
Its mission was to review military pain management 
capabilities and practices and develop recommendations for a comprehensive pain management strategy. 
The resulting PMTF report (2010) outlined over 100 
recommendations for a pain management strategy 
that is “holistic, multidisciplinary, and multimodal in 
its approach, utilizes state of the art/science modalities 
and technologies, and provides optimal quality of life 
for soldiers and other patients with acute and chronic 
pain.”38 This effort has further increased the military 
health system’s reemphasis on pain management, both 
acute and chronic, throughout the casualty evacuation 
chain and within military treatment facilities. 
Casualty care on the modern battlefield is organized 
into four roles of care (previously known as levels) 
that denote increasing medical capability from point 
of injury back to the United States (see Chapter 14, 
Introduction to Health Service Support). 39 A discussion of improvements in pain management of casualties from recent conflicts is best described within this 
framework of the roles of care. 
562
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Role 1: Immediate First Aid Delivered at the Scene
Role 1 care is at point of injury and focused on 
self-aid and buddy aid. One of the most basic and 
important actions the individual soldier can undertake 
to reduce the impact of pain and enhance resilience 
following wounding is through efforts directed at 
achieving better personal health and fitness prior to 
deployment (see Chapter 19, The Evolution of Human Performance Optimization and Total Force Fitness). This concept is embodied by the Army Medical 
Command’s Performance Triad campaign, which 
is designed to establish healthy lifestyle habits with 
focus on physical activity, appropriate nutrition, and 
adequate sleep. 40 Essentially, a healthy person will be 
better prepared to tolerate the physical and psychological stress associated with acute pain, and thus better 
able to resist pain chronification. 
While morphine continues as the primary, gold 
standard analgesic for combat medics, there have been 
significant changes to the Role 1 approach to analgesia. 
One example is the inclusion of a chapter on pain assessment and control (Chapter 30, Basic Medical Skills) 
in the Special Operations Forces Medical Handbook, 2nd 
edition, which serves as a primary medical information 
source for combat medics. 41 This resource provides 
information on the analgesics taken by medics into 
battle, along with the “dos” and “don’ts” of analgesic 
management in this complex and dangerous environment. The primary annual skills sustainment courses 
for medics and corpsmen still have a heavy focus on 
morphine as the primary analgesic. However, Tactical 
Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) guidelines, endorsed 
by the Department of Defense, offer a much broader 
range of analgesic options.
A number of recent developments have occurred 
in acute pain management of combat casualties far 
forward on the modern battlefield. One of the more 
novel approaches, developed by US Special Forces, 
involved issuing individual first aid kits with combat 
pill packs to be used in the event of wounding in 
the combat environment. Essentially, soldiers were 
instructed to self-administer the medications as soon 
as practical if painfully wounded and alert enough to 
open the pack, while remaining in the fight. The packs 
contained a cyclooxygenase-2-selective nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drug (NSAID), meloxicam 15 mg, 
and acetaminophen 650 mg, in addition to the antibiotic gatifloxacin. 42 Neither of the pain medications 
impact platelet function when given as single doses, 
and therefore do not impede clot formation following 
wounding. 43,44 With brilliant simplicity, this approach 
granted the casualty instant access to pain management at the point of injury without reliance on another, 
likely otherwise occupied, soldier. Additionally, these 
medications have no clinically relevant impact on cognition, allowing the wounded soldier to “stay in the 
fight” while still establishing a non-opioid analgesic 
foundation that can be built upon through the roles 
of care when the casualty is evacuated. While the pill 
packs are not currently carried by all soldiers, many 
combat medics and corpsmen have these medications 
available to treat battlefield casualties at the point of 
injury.
For casualties in pain who are unable to fight and 
do not require intravenous access, oral transmucosal 
fentanyl citrate (OTFC), 800 µg transbuccal (a “fentanyl 
lollipop”), is frequently used by combat medics in the 
field. 42 Kotwal el al45 studied 22 hemodynamically stable casualties with uncomplicated orthopedic trauma 
and concluded that OTFC was an effective, rapidacting analgesic alternative for trauma in the combat 
or austere environment. The ability to administer the 
medication via the oral mucosa, negating the need for 
vascular access, is a definitive advantage. One patient 
in this series did experience hypoventilation, which 
remains the primary issue of concern for all opioid 
medications in this environment. Therefore, medics 
continue to be advised to monitor patients closely 
following any opioid administration while keeping 
naloxone readily accessible. 46 The most common side 
effect associated with this approach, as with other 
opioid-based methods, is nausea. 47 Although OTFC 
has demonstrated significant efficacy in managing 
acute trauma pain, like morphine, the risks associated 
with opioid medications are not resolved with this 
delivery method. 
One of the most interesting developments from 
the recent conflicts is the use of ketamine as an analgesic alternative to morphine on the battlefield. 
In the same class of drugs as phencyclidine (PCP), 
ketamine is termed a dissociative anesthetic and has 
been described as producing a cataleptic state, amnesia, and intense analgesia without depression of the 
respiratory rate or blood pressure at low doses. 48,49 
Additionally, ketamine is a noncompetitive antagonist of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, 
which is activated by peripheral nociception, leading 
to hyperexcitability of dorsal root neurons, which 
is thought to contribute to central sensitization and 
the chronification of pain. 49,50 The most common 
side effects associated with ketamine administration 
are psychedelic emergence phenomena, including 
feelings of floating, vivid dreams, hallucinations, 
and delirium. 51,52 These issues can be minimized or 
eliminated if the infusion dose of ketamine utilized is 
low (< 2. 5 µg/kg/min) and certainly these issues are 
not as troublesome as those associated with opioid or 
563
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
NSAID use. 53 Eastridge et al, in a review of 4,596 Iraq 
and Afghanistan combat casualties from October 2001 
to June 2011, identified hemorrhage as responsible for 
90% of deaths from potentially survivable wounds 
and recommended “providing a battlefield analgesia 
option that does not cause respiratory depression or 
exacerbate hemorrhagic shock.”54 Ketamine has many 
attributes that fulfill these conditions. 
The flexibility of ketamine as the principle anesthetic in military situations was demonstrated during 
the Somalia civil war in 1994 and in north Uganda in 
1999. The conditions in these conflicts were so austere 
that patient monitoring during surgery consisted of 
counting respirations and the heart rate while adjusting the ketamine drip rate based on established parameters every 3 to 5 minutes. This was accomplished 
with ancillary staff of variable anesthesia training 
and experience. 55 In the author’s own experience in 
2009, while deployed as an anesthesiologist at Camp 
Bastion, Afghanistan, two options were available for 
providing analgesia during initial trauma assessments: 
morphine and ketamine. In every case where I was the 
lead trauma anesthesiologist, I selected ketamine over 
morphine to provide analgesia due to its consistent 
analgesic effectiveness without the hemodynamic 
complications of respiratory depression and hypotension associated with morphine. Ketamine was also 
extremely useful when a chemical restraint was indicated to prevent patients from injuring themselves, 
or in support of procedures or imaging studies where 
a comfortable and motionless patient was desirable. 
In the recent conflicts, ketamine has been determined 
to be at least as effective as morphine for providing 
analgesia at point of injury and during initial evacuation. 56 In a study of 48 healthy volunteers who were 
asked to perform common military tasks after exposure to morphine 10 mg versus ketamine 25 mg given 
intramuscularly in the deltoid muscle, ketamine was 
associated with more reports of side effects (dizziness, 
poor concentration, or feelings of happiness generally), 
although performance decrements between the two 
medications were minimal. 57 Intranasal delivery of 
ketamine has also been evaluated, removing the need 
for vascular access. 58 
These properties of ketamine make it an ideal Role 1 
analgesic, and recent changes to the TCCC guidelines 
for pain management now include ketamine for the 
first time. 59 Ketamine, either 50 mg intramuscular or 
intranasal, or 20 mg intravenous or intraosseous (administered slowly), is recommended as an additional 
option to opioid therapy for moderate to severe pain in 
Role 1 conditions. In a review of 228 Afghanistan casualties evacuated from the battlefield by rotary aircraft 
from October 2012 to September 2013, the most common analgesic used was ketamine, closely followed 
by morphine; when two analgesics were employed, 
ketamine and morphine were most often used. 60 
Role 2: Forward Surgical Care
Role 2 facilities provide enhanced resuscitation 
services compared to Role 1, with the important addition of surgical assets to provide damage control 
resuscitation and surgery, as well as casualty collection 
and sorting efforts. These facilities are the first level 
of care where blood and blood products are available 
for trauma resuscitation. 61 Analgesic options at this 
level are similar to Role 1, with the addition of general 
anesthesia and single injection RA when indicated. 
An interesting development from the recent conflicts is the use of acupuncture in the management of 
acute pain and stress issues in the far-forward Role 
1 and 2 environment. Working in the deployed military environment is stressful and hard on the body, 
without even considering conditions experienced 
in actual combat. From wearing 40 pounds of body 
armor and equipment, to walking or riding in difficult terrain, and being constantly on alert for danger, 
among many other taxing wartime events, soldiers 
have plenty of reasons to develop painful conditions. 
Military healthcare providers have found acupuncture to be a safe and useful therapy in pain and stress 
management for soldiers on the modern battlefield. 62 
Acupuncture requires minimal equipment to perform, 
is associated with minimal (mostly minor) side effects, and has no abuse potential. The increased use 
of acupuncture, particularly auricular acupuncture, 
in the care of soldiers has been a unique feature of the 
medical response to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
A battalion aid station serving 500 Seabees deployed to 
Iraq from September 2006 through March 2007 managed 132 individual patients with acupuncture for a 
variety of issues, and 80% of these patients required 
no additional medications such as antiinflammatories 
or analgesics. 63 These attributes have prompted some 
medical leaders to suggest acupuncture training and 
services should be a routine component of the military 
response to disaster or war. 64 
Despite published and anecdotal reports of the 
successful application of acupuncture on the modern 
battlefield, the general consensus is that an appropriate evidence base to support standard acupuncture 
care protocols in the military is lacking. 65 This is not 
to suggest a lack of evidence to support acupuncture in the management of a variety of conditions; 
rather, there remains a general dearth of experience 
and system support within the military to develop 
an understanding of acupuncture’s role in military 
564
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
medicine. This situation is changing as the military 
seeks non-opioid options for analgesic care in austere conditions. Although acupuncture has been 
used sporadically throughout the military since the 
1980s, there has been a major educational and clinical transformation in the use of acupuncture during 
the past decade. 66 Initial investment into DoD-wide 
acupuncture training and credentialing has been 
through the introduction of battlefield acupuncture 
(BFA), an auricular acupuncture protocol for pain 
that is taught to all levels of provider within the military. 67 BFA is a series of five auricular points, called 
cingulate gyrus, thalamus, omega 2, point zero, and 
shen men (Figure 36-4), in which semipermanent 
needle studs are placed to reduce pain and stress. 68 
This program was designed to socialize both patients 
and providers to the use of acupuncture in military 
care settings while adding a nonpharmaceutical 
complementary method for treating pain. Although 
considerable additional research and experience is 
needed before acupuncture in the military can be 
considered routine, it is the most developed integrative medicine approach within the federal medicine 
system today and will likely be a common approach 
to managing pain in the future. 
Role 3: Combat Support Hospitals 
The goal of both Role 1 and 2 care efforts is the 
stabilization of the casualty for evacuation to a Role 
3 facility within the war theater. Role 3 facilities have 
the major surgical specialties represented, full anesthesia capability, intensive care, diagnostic imaging, 
laboratory, and blood bank services available. Role 
3 represents the highest level of care within the war 
theater and the first opportunity for restorative care, 
including comprehensive pain management. 
Perhaps one of the most significant concepts to develop from the recent wars is the realization that effective pain management begins at point of injury, must 
operate as a continuum throughout the roles of care, 
extends into the casualty’s evacuation to the United 
States, continues through rehabilitation in medical 
centers, and stretches into the rest of their lives. 69 This 
is a considerable responsibility for any healthcare 
system, but shirking this effort can, and often does, 
destroy the quality and productivity of the life that 
was saved on the battlefield. (This is not to suggest 
that military healthcare providers have ignored pain 
and suffering in the past; in fact, pain management has 
been considered the general responsibility of every 
healthcare provider. Superficially this approach may 
appear to be a reasonable, but when everyone is held 
responsible, no one can be held accountable when pain 
is an issue for the wounded soldier.) 
Despite contemporary understanding of the detrimental impact of inadequate pain management 
on rehabilitation and recovery following trauma or 
surgery,70 adequate and continuous pain management remains a significant challenge for the military, 
particularly in the deployed or evacuation environment. Sophisticated management of pain, beyond the 
application of opioid monotherapy, requires establishment of an APS of dedicated physicians, nurses, 
and support personnel who are both responsible and 
accountable for casualty pain management within the 
CSH. Through a collaboration between US and United 
Kingdom military medical services, a demonstration 
APS was established at the Camp Bastion, Afghanistan, 
CSH in 2009. 71 The British CSH leadership established 
pain management as a key indicator of care quality at 
the facility during the project. APS personnel consisted 
of a physician leader with specialty training in acute 
pain management and RA, as well as pain nurse champions within each care ward in the hospital. The team 
was augmented with specialized equipment dedicated 
Figure 36-4. Battlefield acupuncture auricular points. Points 
are usually placed in the following order: cingulate gyrus, 
thalamus, omega 2, point zero, and shen men (CTOPS).
Photograph courtesy of Richard C. Niemtzow, MD
565
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
to pain management, including pain infusion pumps, 
RA catheters and equipment, peripheral nerve stimulators, and a portable ultrasound machine. 
During this particular demonstration, approximately 455 trauma cases were managed by the CSH trauma 
team, and the APS physician rounded daily with 
the team as the pain consultant. Unusual or difficult 
acute pain cases were managed directly by the APS, 
although all casualties received a multimodal pain care 
plan. Table 36-1 outlines the frequency of intravenous 
and oral analgesic medications that were used in this 
patient cohort. Of the 71 casualties managed directly 
by the APS in this project, 51 (71. 8%) received RA as 
part of their multimodal pain plan. The majority of 
these patients had traumatic amputations or limb 
injuries. The average improvement in pain scores (for 
those able to report), based on the casualties’ recall 
estimate of their pain at point of injury, was 51. 9% (± 
31. 2). A general survey of healthcare providers at the 
CSH during the project period was also performed to 
evaluate their perceptions of the value of the activity to 
overall care. 72 The survey consisted of items designed 
to appraise staff impressions of APS outcomes, complexity of care, decision-making support, and pain 
management education. Generally the survey revealed 
considerable enthusiasm for the establishment of the 
CSH APS. Respondents agreed that soldiers managed 
by the APS reported reduced levels of pain (64. 8%) 
and obtained greater relief (73. 9%). The staff generally agreed (73. 5%) that the APS had a positive overall 
impact on patient outcomes. 
The Camp Bastion APS also provided opportunities for innovation in dealing with difficult clinical 
pain situations. For example, ventilator beds within 
the CSH intensive care unit were limited, and failure 
to wean patients efficiently from this constrained resource impacted the CSH’s mission readiness. Patients 
who sustained abdominal wounds were notoriously 
difficult to remove from the ventilator following a 
laparotomy due to poor respiratory drive secondary 
to severe abdominal pain. Epidural catheters infusing 
local anesthetics are a possibility in these patients, although patient positioning and anticoagulation issues 
often precluded this option. To overcome this clinical 
dilemma, APS staff employed a bilateral continuous 
transversus abdominis plane block to provide sufficient abdominal wall analgesia to allow patients to 
be weaned off ventilator support faster. This was one 
of the first descriptions of this technique being used 
within a war theater for this purpose. 73
As previously discussed, rapid evacuation of 
wounded by aircraft has contributed greatly to the 
increased survival of casualties in recent conflicts. A 
specific advantage of a functioning APS within the 
CSH is the ability to prepare patients, from a pain 
management perspective, for long evacuation flights to 
medical centers outside the conflict theater. 74 The use 
of advanced pain control technology on air evacuation 
flights, such as patient controlled analgesic infusions, 
CPNBs, and novel analgesic medications, depends 
on APS efforts at the CSH for the safe application 
and transfer of these modalities onto the medically 
austere aircraft environment. APS services must also 
be established at the receiving facility for appropriate 
care plan communication and safe management of 
pain care modalities at the receiving medical center. 
Recognition of the importance of pain management 
within the roles of care and evacuation chain has 
resulted in the establishment of a Joint Theater 
Trauma System Clinical Practice Guideline on Pain, 
Anxiety and Delirium, most recently updated in 
March 2017 (http://jts.amedd.army.mil/assets/docs/
cpgs/JTS_Clinical_Practice_Guidelines_(CPGs)/
Pain_Anxiety_Delirium_13_Mar_2017_ID29.pdf). 
This document provides a doctrinal basis for the need 
and establishment of an APS in Role 3 and above 
medical treatment facilities. It also outlines many of 
TABLE 36-1
FREQUENCY OF INTRAVENOUS AND ORAL 
ANALGESIC ADMINISTRATION
Medication
No. of 
Patients
Frequency (%) 
of Patients
Paracetamol (IV)
66
93. 0
Diclofenac (IV)
59
83. 1
Morphine (IV)
30
42. 3
Oramorph SR (PO)
19
26. 8
Codeine (PO)
5
7. 0
Ketamine (IV)
5
7. 0
Ketorolac (IV)
5
7. 0
Ibuprofen (PO)
4
5. 6
Tramadol (PO)
4
5. 6
Acetaminophen (PO)
1
1. 4
Amitriptyline (PO)
1
1. 4
Co-codamol (PO)
1
1. 4
Methocarbamol (PO)
1
1. 4
IV: intravenous
PO: per os (by mouth)
Reproduced with permission from: Buckenmaier C III, Mahoney PF, 
Anton T, Kwon N, Polomano RC. Impact of an acute pain service 
on pain outcomes with combat-injured soldiers at Camp Bastion, 
Afghanistan. Pain Med. 2012;13:919–926.
566
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
the innovations in pain care that have been established 
during current conflicts. Even with the creation of 
this wartime practice guideline, organization of APS 
services in current CSH settings remains inconsistent. 
General medical command understanding and 
emphasis of the importance of pain management in 
combat casualty care is required to make this guideline 
a standard of practice in the next war. 
Roles 4 and 5: Medical Centers Outside the Theater 
Role 4 facilities are full-service military hospitals 
located outside the war theater of operations. LRMC 
has served as the primary evacuation hospital for 
both Iraq and Afghanistan and is the current epitome 
of Role 4 care. The success of new pain technologies 
established in Role 3 depended on the establishment of 
an APS presence at LRMC early in the conflicts. During 
the course of the conflicts, Walter Reed Army Medical 
Center anesthesiology residents performed monthlong training rotations at the LRMC APS in support 
of the activity and to gain practical experience in the 
acute pain management of war casualties. The investment in this training experience by military graduate 
medical education highlights the importance of the 
APS activity to casualty management at the critical 
LRMC casualty evacuation node. 
Role 5 military medical centers located within the 
United States represent the final and most capable 
expression of military medicine. Recovering wounded 
remain weeks to months in these rehabilitation facilities, undergoing physical and psychological restoration. The APS service and effective management of 
pain is, again, a key component of care at this level. 
Collection of actionable patient-reported outcome data 
in this complex environment becomes even more critical to provide the needed evidence to drive innovation 
in pain diagnosis and treatment. 
PAIN MEASUREMENT
The LRMC APS provided opportunity for some 
of the only research on casualty pain levels since 
Beecher’s efforts from World War II. A survey of 110 
wounded from July 2007 to February 2008 revealed 
that pain scores in this cohort tended to be high during 
evacuation flights (>4 on a numeric rating scale), and 
respondents often failed to receive a 50% reduction 
in their pain despite recent advances in inflight pain 
care. 28 Unfortunately, this small survey represents one 
of the very few attempts to quantify and track casualty 
pain during the recent years of conflict, representing a 
missed opportunity to better understand the impact of 
pain on the recovering casualty. There is a fundamental 
need for better pain data, collected throughout all roles 
of care, to enhance the understanding of how pain on 
the modern battlefield can best be managed to enhance 
overall patient outcomes. 
One of the primary findings and recommendations from the PMTF 2010 report was the need for an 
improved pain assessment tool able to measure pain 
intensity, mood, stress, biopsychosocial impact, and 
functional impact across all roles of care. 38 In response, 
the Defense and Veterans Pain Rating Scale (DVPRS)75 
was developed and validated to provide a standardized measure for pain in all manner of military treatment facilities (Figure 36-5). The DVPRS scale is unique 
in its employment of functional language labels for 
each pain measurement number on the zero-to-ten 
scale, along with pain faces and colored pain intensity 
bars to assist patients in rating pain intensity. The use 
of functional language anchors for each pain intensity 
number reduces response variability and enhances 
consistency of the pain question throughout the care 
system. The addition of questions on the impact of 
pain on activity, sleep, mood, and stress emphasizes 
the important biopsychosocial variables that influence 
the overall pain experience. Adaptation of the DVPRS 
as the federal pain question standard through all roles 
of care could standardize pain data and improve understanding of the clinical impact of pain management 
treatments. The lack of quality, standardized, patientreported outcome data on pain has been a major source 
of inertia in the development and adoption of novel 
pain care modalities on the modern battlefield. Pain 
data of this type will become even more vital if the 
promise of genomics guiding future medical care is 
to be realized. 76,77 
The PMTF also recommended the development 
of a Pain Assessment Screening Tool and Outcomes 
Registry (PASTOR) to inform clinical care visits and 
provide comprehensive data on treatment effectiveness. PASTOR utilizes the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) 
developed through the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH). 78 Although a complete discussion of PASTOR 
is beyond the scope of this chapter, the program leverages computer adaptive technology and validated NIH 
measurement domains (anxiety, depression, fatigue, 
sleep impairment, among others) to create a detailed 
clinician summary report on pain with far more clinically useful information than what is obtained with 
the standard numeric (0–10) pain rating scale currently 
used in most clinical situations. Furthermore, this 
data, along with patient demographic and treatment 
information, goes into a registry to support process 
improvement research. 
567
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
Figure 36-5. Defense and Veterans Pain Rating Scale.
CONCLUSION
MMOs have a long history of alleviating acute 
pain and suffering; it is one of the greatest blessings 
bestowed on the battlefield. Recent focus has been 
on alternative strategies for acute pain management 
specific to the various roles of care, branching out 
with an expanded armament of medications, as well 
as nonpharmacologic adjuncts such as RA and acupuncture. The need for the APS system and standardized patient-reported pain outcome data collection 
cannot be overemphasized as novel medications and 
568
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
technologies continue to be developed for use in the 
military environment. There is also a developing understanding about the chronification of pain. The APS 
system provides a vital link between acute pain care 
and specialty chronic pain services, which is crucial 
when chronic pain complicates recovery. 
Acute pain chronification is a complex disease 
process that defies a single medication or procedural 
solution. Although development of a system approach 
to pain through the APS may be challenging in the 
currently taxed medical environment, the elements 
for establishing APS services are already inherent 
to deployed and fixed medical facilities. Command 
emphasis on pain management is required as a key 
indicator of patient care quality within all military 
treatment facilities. This emphasis must be continuously validated through collection of pain care data as 
patients pass through all roles of care. Investment in 
this pain care system will establish the infrastructure 
required to maintain advancements achieved in the 
present conflicts and stimulate research and innovation in the next conflict. As John Bonica observed in 
The Management of Pain, “The proper management of 
pain remains, after all, the most important obligation, 
the main objective, and the crowning achievement of 
every physician.”10 In the author’s own experience, few 
things in life are as personally rewarding as relieving 
the pain of a wounded soldier. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Farwell B. Stonewall: A Biography of General Thomas J. Jackson. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company; 1992: 492–526.
 
2. Lewy J. The Army disease: drug addiction and the Civil War. War Hist. 2013;21:102–119.
 
3. Brownstein MJ. A brief history of opiates, opioid peptides, and opioid receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993;90:5391–
5393.
 
4. Ranby J. The nature and treatment of gunshot wounds. In: Van Swieten G, eds. The Diseases Incident to Armies. Philadelphia, PA: R. Bell; 1776: 136.
 
5. Terry CE, Pellens M. The Opium Problem. New York, NY: Committee on Drug Addictions and Bureau of Social Hygiene; 
1928: 69.
 
6. Meldrum ML. A capsule history of pain management. JAMA. 2003;290:2470–2475.
 
7. Beecher HK. Pain in men wounded in battle. Ann Surg. 1946;123:96–105.
 
8. Meldrum ML. Brief history of multidisciplinary management of chronic pain, 1900-2000. In: Schatman ME, Campbell 
A, eds. Chronic Pain Management: Guidelines for Multidisciplinary Program Development. New York, NY: Informa Healthcare; 2007: 1–13.
 
9. Bonica JJ. Organization and function of a multidisciplinary pain clinic. In: Weisenberg M, Tursky B, eds. Pain. Boston, 
MA: Springer; 1976: 11–20.
 10. Bonica JJ. The Management of Pain. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1953:593.
 11. Apkarian AV, Baliki MN, Farmer MA. Predicting transition to chronic pain. Curr Opin Neurol. 2013;26:360–367.
 12. Gawande A. Casualties of war—military care for the wounded from Iraq and Afghanistan. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2471–
2475.
 13. Air transport of the critically injured patient: controlling pain during transport and flight. In: Buckenmaier CC, Bleckner L, eds. Military Advanced Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 113–118.
 14. Buckenmaier CC, McKnight GM, Winkley JV, et al. Continuous peripheral nerve block for battlefield anesthesia and 
evacuation. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2005;30:202–205.
 15. Buckenmaier CC III, Lee EH, Shields CH, Sampson JB, Chiles JH. Regional anesthesia in austere environments. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med. 2003;28 321–327.
569
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
 16. Owens BD, Kragh Jr JF, Wenke JC, Macaitis J, Wade CE, Holcomb JB. Combat wounds in Operation Iraqi Freedom 
and Operation Enduring Freedom. J Trauma. 2008;64:295–299.
 17. Buckenmaier CC 3rd, Bleckner L. Military Advanced Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 
2009.
 18. Gironda RJ, Clark ME, Massengale JP, Walker RL. Pain among veterans of Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi 
Freedom. Pain Med. 2006;7:339–343.
 19. Woolf CJ. Pain: moving from symptom control toward mechanism-specific pharmacologic management. Ann Intern 
Med. 2004;140:441–451.
 20. Ossipov MH, Morimura K, Porreca F. Descending pain modulation and chronification of pain. Curr Opin Support 
Palliat Care. 2014;8:143–151.
 21. May A. Chronic pain may change the structure of the brain. Pain. 2008;137:7–15.
 22. Lew HL, Otis JD, Tun C, Kerns RD, Clark ME, Cifu DX. Prevalence of chronic pain, posttraumatic stress disorder, and 
persistent postconcussive symptoms in OIF/OEF veterans: polytrauma clinical triad. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2009;46:697–702.
 23. Rajagopal A, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, Palmer JL, Kaur G, Bruera E. Symptomatic hypogonadism in male survivors of 
cancer with chronic exposure to opioids. Cancer. 2004; 00:851–858.
 24. Raghavan S, Harvey AD, Humble SR. New opioid side effects and implications for long-term therapy. Trends Anesth 
Crit Care. 2011;1:18–21.
 25. Angst MS, Clark JD. Opioid-induced hyperalgesia: a qualitative systematic review. Anesthesiology. 2006;104:570–587.
 26. Sharpe Potter J, Bebarta VS, Marino EN, Ramos RG, Turner BJ. Pain management and opioid risk mitigation in the 
military. Mil Med. 2014;179:553–558.
 27. Weisberg DF, Becker WC, Fiellin DA, Stannard C. Prescription opioid misuse in the United States and the United 
Kingdom: Cautionary lessons. Int J Drug Policy. 2014;25:1124–1130.
 28. Buckenmaier CC III, Rupprecht C, McKnight G, et al. Pain following battlefield injury and evacuation: a survey of 110 
casualties from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Pain Med. 2009;10:1487–1496.
 29. Upp J, Kent M, Tighe PJ. The evolution and practice of acute pain medicine. Pain Med. 2013;14:124–144.
 30. Rosero EB, Joshi GP. Preemptive, preventive, multimodal analgesia: what do they really mean? Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2014;134:85S–93S.
 31. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Acute Pain Management. Practice guidelines for acute pain 
management in the perioperative setting: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Acute Pain Management. Anesthesiology. 2012;116:248–273.
 32. Ballantyne JC, Carr DB, deFerranti S, et al. The comparative effects of postoperative analgesic therapies on pulmonary 
outcome: cumulative meta-analyses of randomized, controlled trials. Anesth Analg. 1998;86:598–612.
 33. Carr DB, Goudas LC. Acute pain. Lancet. 1999;353:2051-2058.
 34. Gilron I, Kehlet H: Prevention of chronic pain after surgery: new insights for future research and patient care. Can J 
Anaesth. 2014;61:101–111.
 35. Kehlet H, Jensen TS, Woolf CJ. Persistent postsurgical pain: risk factors and prevention. Lancet. 2006;367:1618–1625.
 36. Wu CL, Raja SN. Treatment of acute postoperative pain. Lancet. 2011:377(9784);2215–2225.
570
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 37. Buchheit T, Van de Ven T, Shaw A. Epigenetics and the transition from acute to chronic pain. Pain Med. 2012;13:1474–1490.
 38. Pain Management Task Force Final Report, May 2010. Falls Church, VA: Office of the Army Surgeon General; 2010. 
 39. Roles of Medical Care (United States). In: Cubano MA, Lenhart MK, Bailey JA, eds. Emergency War Surgery. 4th ed. 
Fort Sam Houston, TX: Borden Institute; 2013: Chap 2.
 40. Deuster PA, Silverman MN. Physical fitness: a pathway to health and resilience. US Army Med Dep J. 2013;24–35.
 41. Buckenmaier CC. Basic medical skills: pain assessment and control. In: Farr WD, ed. Special Operations Forces Medical 
Handbook. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 2008: 8-33–8-36.
 42. Black IH, McManus J. Pain management in current combat operations. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2009;13:223–227.
 43. Hinz B, Brune K. Paracetamol and cyclooxygenase inhibition: is there a cause for concern? Ann Rheum Dis. 2012;71:20–25.
 44. Rinder HM, Tracey JB, Souhrada M, Wang C, Gagnier RP, Wood CC. Effects of meloxicam on platelet function in 
healthy adults: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Pharmacol. 2002;2:881–886.
 45. Kotwal RS, O’Connor KC, Johnson TR, Mosely DS, Meyer DE, Holcomb JB. A novel pain management strategy for 
combat casualty care. Ann Emerg Med. 2004;44:121–127.
 46. US Army. Combat Medic Field Reference. Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2005.
 47. Wedmore IS, Kotwal RS, McManus JG, et al. Safety and efficacy of oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate for prehospital 
pain control on the battlefield. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:S490–S495.
 48. White PF, Way WL, Trevor AJ. Ketamine—its pharmacology and therapeutic uses. Anesthesiology. 1982;56:119–136.
 49. Subramaniam K, Subramaniam B, Steinbrook RA. Ketamine as adjuvant analgesic to opioids: a quantitative and 
qualitative systematic review. Anesth Analg. 2004;99:482–495.
 50. Woolf CJ, Thompson SW. The induction and maintenance of central sensitization is dependent on N-methyl-D-aspartic 
acid receptor activation; implications for the treatment of post-injury pain hypersensitivity states. Pain. 1991;44:293–299.
 51. Haas DA, Harper DG. Ketamine: a review of its pharmacologic properties and use in ambulatory anesthesia. Anesth 
Prog. 1992;39:61.
 52. Green SM, Li J. Ketamine in adults: what emergency physicians need to know about patient selection and emergence 
reactions. Acad Emerg Med. 2000;7:278–281.
 53. Schmid RL, Sandler AN, Katz J. Use and efficacy of low-dose ketamine in the management of acute postoperative 
pain: a review of current techniques and outcomes. Pain. 1999;82:111–125.
 54. Eastridge BJ, Mabry RL, Seguin P, et al. Death on the battlefield (2001-2011): implications for the future of combat 
casualty care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:S431–S437.
 55. Bonanno FG. Ketamine in war/tropical surgery (a final tribute to the racemic mixture). Injury. 2002;33:323–327.
 56. Shackelford SA, Fowler M, Schultz K, et al. Prehospital pain medication use by US Forces in Afghanistan. Mil Med. 
2015;180:304–309.
 57. Gaydos SJ, Kelley AM, Grandizio CM, Athy JR, Walters PL. Comparison of the effects of ketamine and morphine on 
performance of representative military tasks. J Emerg Med. 2015;48:313–324.
 58. Carr DB, Goudas LC, Denman WT, et al. Safety and efficacy of intranasal ketamine for the treatment of breakthrough pain 
in patients with chronic pain: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Pain. 2004;108:17–27.
571
Acute Pain Management in the Deployed Environment
 59. Butler FK, Kotwal RS, Buckenmaier CC 3rd, et al. A triple-option analgesia plan for tactical combat casualty care: 
TCCC guidelines change 13-04. J Spec Oper Med. 2014;14:13–25.
 60. Petz LN, Tyner S, Barnard E, et al. Prehospital and en route analgesic use in the combat setting: a prospectively designed, multicenter, observational study. Mil Med. 2015;180:14–18.
 61. Hooper TJ, Nadler R, Badloe J, Butler FK, Glassberg E. Implementation and execution of military forward resuscitation 
programs. Shock. 2014;41:90–97.
 62. Koffman RL. Downrange acupuncture. Med Acupunct. 2011;23:215–218.
 63. Spira A. Acupuncture: a useful tool for health care in an operational medicine environment. Mil Med. 2008;173:629–634.
 64. Belard JL, Pock AR. Acupuncture and NATO. Med Acupunct. 2011;23:271–273.
 65. Edwards E, Louis Belard J, Glowa J, Khalsa P, Weber W, Huntley K. DoD-NCCAM/NIH workshop on acupuncture 
for treatment of acute pain. J Altern Complement Med. 2013;19:266–279.
 66. Pock AR. Acupuncture in the US armed forces: a brief history and review of current educational approaches. Med 
Acupunct. 2011;23:205–208.
 67. Bart-Knauer B, Friedl KE. When will acupuncture become a first-line treatment for acute pain management? Mil Med. 
2013;178:827–828.
 68. King HC, Hickey AH, Connelly C. Auricular acupuncture: a brief introduction for military providers. Mil Med. 
2013;178:867–874.
 69. Gallagher RM, Polomano R. Early, continuous, and restorative pain management in injured soldiers: the challenge 
ahead. Pain Med. 2006;7:284–286.
 70. Joshi GP, Ogunnaike BO. Consequences of inadequate postoperative pain relief and chronic persistent postoperative 
pain. Anesthesiol Clin North America. 2005;23:21–36.
 71. Buckenmaier C III, Mahoney PF, Anton T, Kwon N, Polomano RC. Impact of an acute pain service on pain outcomes 
with combat-injured soldiers at Camp Bastion, Afghanistan. Pain Med. 2012;13:919–926.
 72. Polomano RC, Chisholm E, Anton TM, Kwon N, Mahoney PF, Buckenmaier C III. A survey of military health professionals’ perceptions of an acute pain service at Camp Bastion, Afghanistan. Pain Med. 2012;13:927–936.
 73. Allcock E, Spencer E, Frazer R, Applegate G, Buckenmaier C III. Continuous transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block 
catheters in a combat surgical environment. Pain Med. 2010;11:1426–1429.
 74. Baker BC, Buckenmaier C, Narine N, Compeggie ME, Brand GJ, Mongan PD. Battlefield anesthesia: advances in patient 
care and pain management. Anesthesiol Clin. 2007;25:131–145,x.
 75. Buckenmaier CC, Galloway KT, Polomano RC, McDuffie M, Kwon N, Gallagher RM. Preliminary validation of the 
Defense and Veterans Pain Rating Scale (DVPRS) in a military population. Pain Med. 2013;14:110–123.
 76. Auffray C, Chen Z, Hood L. Systems medicine: the future of medical genomics and healthcare. Genome Med. 2009;1:2.
 77. McGuire AL, Cho MK, McGuire SE, Caulfield T. Medicine. The future of personal genomics. Science. 2007;317:1687.
 78. Cook KF, Buckenmaier C 3rd, Gershon RC. PASTOR/PROMIS pain outcomes system: what does it mean to pain 
specialists? Pain Manag. 2014;4:277–283.
572
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
