299
Performance Nutrition
PERFORMANCE NUTRITION
PATRICIA A. DEUSTER, PhD, MPH,* and JONATHAN SCOTT, PhD†
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
HISTORY OF MILITARY NUTRITION
Importance of Nutrition and Mission Success
Committee for Military Nutrition Research
BACKGROUND 
Establishing Nutrient Requirements
Evolution of Performance Nutrition
SCOPE OF PRACTICE
KEY CONCEPTS
Nutrient Timing
Protein Requirements
Dietary Supplements
Caffeine Dosing
PERFORMANCE NUTRITION AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Role of the Military Medical Officer
Guidance to Commanding Officer
RESOURCES
SUMMARY
*Professor and Director, Consortium for Health and Military Performance (CHAMP), Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, 
Maryland
†Assistant Professor, Department of Military & Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
Chapter 21
300
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The contributions of nutrition to health and performance are well established,1–3 and within the Department of Defense (DoD), nutritional fitness (NF) is a key 
component of total force fitness (TFF). NF is intricately 
woven into each TFF domain, including the medical, 
behavioral, psychological, environmental, physical, 
social, and spiritual domains. Nutritional choices and 
habits affect every aspect of life: sleep, mood, physical 
and cognitive performance, sense of purpose, health, 
and more. 
The readiness status of current and future service 
members is markedly affected by their NF. Fast food 
restaurants and physically passive recreational outlets 
(eg, video games, television, movies) are omnipresent 
in civilian and military communities alike. NF must 
be a priority of military medical and line leaders at 
every level. Importantly, a comprehensive/holistic approach can ensure NF and serve to inform the military 
enterprise and bases, and teach leaders and troops how 
to promote, implement, achieve, and maintain good 
health in addition to demanding, endorsing, and supporting the concept of NF.
DoD Instruction (DoDI) 6130. 05, DoD Nutrition 
Committee,4 directs nutrition education within the 
DoD, and nutrition education is key to NF. Education must encompass performance nutrition, health 
promotion, dietary supplements, and optimal fuel 
choices in dining facilities and other fueling environments. First and foremost, performance fueling 
needs to be incorporated into all leadership courses 
and into various types of individual and unit training, including unit mission-essential task lists, joint 
exercises, and predeployment training (to provide 
nutrition information specific to environmental conditions and threats in the area of operations). This 
will ensure performance fueling is taught from the 
individual through the unit level. Additionally, the 
application of performance fueling must be incorporated into all military doctrine to ensure its continuation across time.
DEFINITIONS
Exhibit 21-1 defines a variety of important nutrition 
terms commonly used within the DoD, including NF, 
performance nutrition, and the military dietary reference 
intakes (MDRIs). Likewise, Exhibit 21-2 presents key 
nutrition terms and definitions used across the nation 
to ensure comparability with regard to nutrient intake. 
HISTORY OF MILITARY NUTRITION
The military community has a long history of interest in nutrition, and many military leaders made extraordinary strides in the nutritional sciences. In 1753, 
Dr James Lind, a Scottish physician who is considered 
the father of military nutrition, wrote A Treatise of the 
Scurvy, detailing experiments he conducted in an effort to prevent and treat scurvy in the Royal Navy. 
Ultimately, he determined citrus fruits, specifically 
oranges and lemons, could be used to prevent and 
treat scurvy because they contained Vitamin C, an essential nutrient. In 1778, American Dr Benjamin Rush 
wrote Directions for Preserving the Health of Soldiers, 
which advocated for a diet consisting chiefly of vegetables for soldiers. Military nutrition research in the 
United States formally began in 1917 when the Surgeon 
General’s Office established a food division for the 
purpose of “safeguarding the nutritional interests of 
the Army.”5 Military nutrition has always been associated with safety, health, readiness, and performance.
In 1940, the US Food and Nutrition Board was established to investigate nutritional issues that might 
“affect national defense.”6 Areas of interest included 
the safety and adequacy of the US food supply and 
principles and guidelines for good nutrition. Now 
a part of the US Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS), the Food and Nutrition Board remains 
an authority on how nutrition and food choices affect 
overall health and disease.
In 1949, when the National Military Establishment 
was renamed the Department of Defense (DoD), the 
energy and nutritional demands of service members 
engaged in training and missions became of interest. 
The activities of service members are often unique and 
vary greatly from the general population, particularly 
with regard to environmental exposures (eg, heat, 
cold, depth, and altitude) and physical activity. Service 
members must be well nourished to remain healthy 
and fit for service. Today, developing, implementing 
and evaluating effective nutritional strategies to optimize performance before, during, and after training 
and operations remains a high priority for the DoD.
Importance of Nutrition and Mission Success
Mission success has always hinged upon adequate 
nutrition. From the ancient Egyptians to the Greeks, 
301
Performance Nutrition
Persians, and Romans, every successful military 
relied on appropriate nutrition. The universal quote 
highlighting the importance of military nutrition 
comes from either Fredrick the Great or Napoleon 
Bonaparte: “A military marches on its stomach.” 
Never were such words truer than during Napoleon’s 
1812 winter campaign in Russia. During this period 
Napoleon lost nearly 500,000 men due to their deviations from supply train routes and instructions to live 
off the land. 7,8
EXHIBIT 21-1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE NUTRITION TERMS 
 
• Nutritional fitness. Having the appropriate quantity, quality, choice, and timing of safe fuels, nutrients, 
and fluids and the requisite nutritional environment to sustain and optimize physical and cognitive performance, wellness, and health; accelerate healing; and protect against disease. An eating environment that 
makes healthy choices the easy choice, along with performance-based nutrition education, will help promote 
nutritional fitness and a resilient and fit force. When necessary, dietary supplements may be recommended 
to supplement the diet.
 
• Performance nutrition. Nutritional contribution to the execution of physical and cognitive actions by the 
human body to the greatest degree attainable under specified conditions and objectives.
 
• Military dietary reference intakes. Nutritional standards for military feeding, operational rations, and for 
restricted rations, as noted in US Army Regulation 40-25 (AR 40-25, OPNAV Instruction 10110. 1, Marine Corps 
Order 10110. 49, Air Force Instruction 44-141). The proponent of AR 40-25 is the Army surgeon general, who 
has the authority to approve exceptions or waivers to the regulation that are consistent with controlling laws 
and regulations. MDRIs are identical to recommended nutrient intakes cited in the above references, except 
when known differences in the military population require adjustment of a particular nutrient.
EXHIBIT 21-2
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES NUTRITION TERMS 
 
• Dietary reference intakes. A set of four reference values that are quantitative estimates of nutrient intakes 
to be used for planning and assessing diets for healthy people: 
 
◦ 
Estimated average requirement. Reflects nutrient intake levels to meet the needs of ~50% of healthy 
individuals.
 
◦ 
Recommended dietary allowance. Daily dietary intake level considered sufficient by the Food and Nutrition Board to meet requirements of nearly all healthy individuals (97%–98%) in each life-stage and 
gender group. RDAs are revised every 5-10 years.
 
◦ 
Adequate intake. The recommended average daily intake level based on observed or experimentally 
determined approximations or estimates of nutrient intake by a group (or groups) of apparently healthy 
people that are assumed to be adequate. Used when an RDA cannot be determined.
 
◦ 
Tolerable upper intake levels. Highest level of daily consumption that current data have shown to cause 
no side effects in humans when used indefinitely without medical supervision.
 
• Daily value. The percent of daily value is shown on the labels of dietary supplements and foods and is 
usually similar to the RDA or adequate intake for that nutrient. This term was developed by the Food and 
Drug Administration to help consumers determine how much (what percentage) a serving of the product 
contributed to the daily value of various nutrients.
 
• Acceptable macronutrient distribution range. Reflects an intake range for carbohydrate, protein, and fat 
associated with reduced risk of chronic disease while providing adequate nutrients.
302
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
In the US Revolutionary War, rations provided to 
soldiers consisted of salt-cured meat, beans or peas, 
rice or “Indian meal” (cornmeal), milk, flour or hard 
bread, and spruce beer or cider. During the Civil War, 
cattle drives followed soldiers in an effort to provide 
them with more fresh meat. World War I saw the advent of canned foods. As many as 23 different rations 
were available to meet the diverse needs of service 
members during World War II and the Korean War. 
During the Vietnam War, freeze-dried rations became 
available to forward operating Special Forces units 
in an effort to remove metal containers from rations. 
The first Meal, Ready-to-Eat (MRE) was developed in 
1980 and was widely distributed to service members 
in 1983. MREs are still used and serve as the main 
individual ration for the deployed service member. 
In addition to the MRE, 16 additional categories of 
rations are produced to meet a variety of needs from 
religious dietary restrictions to survival situations and 
humanitarian efforts. 9 
Service members today operate all over the world 
in a variety of climates, environments, and altitudes. 
Accordingly, the Combat Feeding Directorate is tasked 
with developing rations to meet the nutritional needs 
of all service members. The directorate’s mission is to 
“sustain the Department of Defense’s most decisive 
weapons platform—the individual Warfighter.”10 
MREs must comply with the nutritional requirements 
described in Army Regulation 40-25, Nutrition and 
Menu Standards for Human Performance Optimization. 11 
Additionally, the Joint Services Operational Rations 
Forum meets annually to approve new rations and 
changes to components within rations.
On average, one MRE provides approximately 1,300 
calories, 170 g of carbohydrates (CHO), 40 g of protein, 
and 50 g of fat. The number of rations provided to 
service members is dependent upon gender and activity level. MREs are designed to meet all nutritional 
requirements of the service member when consumed 
in their entirety. MREs can be used as the sole source 
of calories for up to 21 days. Currently, 24 different 
MRE options are available. 10 
New rations continue to be developed to meet the 
needs of service members around the world. The First 
Strike Ration (FSR) is the newest individual ration developed by the Combat Feeding Directorate. Fielded 
in 2008, the FSR was specifically developed for multiday, high-intensity combat missions. The FSR consists 
of several hand-held items designed to be eaten while 
moving. On average, one FSR provides approximately 
2,900 calories, 375 g of CHO, 100 g of protein, and 110 
g of fat. Service members are provided one FSR per 
day, and FSRs can be used as the sole source of calories 
for up 10 days. Currently, nine different FSR options 
are available. 10 
Committee for Military Nutrition Research 
The Committee on Military Nutrition Research 
was established in October 1982 under the direction of the assistant surgeon general of the Army. 
Committee members, who served a 3-year term, had 
diverse backgrounds including human nutrition, 
nutritional biochemistry, performance physiology, 
immunology, food science, and psychology. 12 The 
committee’s mission was to advise the DoD on nutrient requirements for performance during operational missions and deployment and to identify gaps 
within military nutrition research. 12 The committee 
had four tasks:
 
1. identify nutritional factors that may critically influence the physical and mental 
performance of military personnel under all 
environmental extremes; 
 
2. identify deficiencies in the existing database 
regarding the relationship between diet and 
performance of military personnel; 
 
3. recommend research that would remedy 
these deficiencies as well as approaches for 
studying the relationship of diet to physical 
and mental performance; and
 
4. review and advise on standards for military 
feeding systems. 
A subcommittee was established to review topics 
specifically related to female service members. Topics 
of interest included postpartum return-to-duty standards, military recommended dietary allowances, and 
individual and collective impact of physical activity 
and nutritional practices on the health, fitness, and 
readiness of female service members. Subject matter 
experts in body composition assessment, physical 
fitness and performance, pregnancy and lactation, 
women’s nutrition, weight management, epidemiology and survey design, and cognitive performance 
were included. Additionally, a liaison panel of service 
members from the Army, Navy, and Air Force with 
expertise in body composition, fitness, and nutrition 
research and policy-making were included to ensure 
military relevance. 12 Between 1992 and 2011, the committee produced approximately 18 publications on a 
variety of nutritionally relevant topics; it disbanded 
in 2013. 13
303
Performance Nutrition
BACKGROUND
Establishing Nutrient Requirements
In 1941, the Food and Nutrition Board released 
the first recommended dietary allowances (RDAs). 
The committee developed RDA values for selected 
nutrients known at the time, based on age and gender, 
as well as for women during pregnancy and lactation. The first RDAs were intended to be “a table of 
allowances which would represent the best available 
evidence on the amounts of the various nutritive 
essentials desirable to include in practical diets.”14 
Essential nutrients were identified when dietary 
deficiency led to the development of a well-defined 
disease or a failure to grow. An animal growth 
model was used to identify essential nutrients and 
to quantify requirements. RDAs were updated every 
5 to 10 years over the next 5 decades as new science 
emerged. 15 
In the mid-1990s, the United States and Canada set 
out to establish a single set of nutrient-based dietary 
reference intakes (DRIs) to replace the RDAs. More 
than 40 nutrients were reviewed and recommendations were based on the totality of available scientific 
evidence. Nearly 20 years later, six volumes of DRI 
recommendations have been released. Each nutrient 
DRI is intended to meet the needs of healthy people 
(not individuals with disease), including age-specific 
recommendations that reflect the current knowledge 
of biological patterns, and providing sex-specific 
recommendations if reasonable scientific evidence 
was available. DRIs are not updated on a regular 
basis but rather as new bodies of scientific literature 
emerge. 16,17 
Evolution of Performance Nutrition
The first Olympiad of ancient Greece was held 
in 776 bce. Written text from the 3rd century ce 
documents the importance of nutrition and athletic performance dating back to the 6th century 
bce. 18 Ancient text describes athletes consuming 
a diet of figs, moist cheese, and wheat. 18 Further 
evolution of dietary practices in ancient Greece 
incorporated meat from oxen, bulls, deer, and 
goats, along with bread made from barley and 
unleavened bread made from wheat. Ancient texts 
also highlight the negative effects of excessive 
wine consumption on athletic performance by 
stating that overeating was not the problem, but 
rather drunkenness. 19,20 
Upon conclusion of the last Olympiad in 393 
ce, limited scientific papers examining nutrition 
and athletic performance were produced over the 
next 15 centuries. At the 1936 Olympics, scientist 
Paul Schenk meticulously recorded what Olympians from nearly all countries ate in the Olympic 
village. According to Schenk’s analysis, athletes 
consumed an average of 320 g of protein, 270 g 
of fat, 850 g of CHO, and up to 7,300 kcals per 
day. Unfortunately, Schenk did not analyze his 
data for relationships between dietary intake and 
athletic performance, but he did acknowledge the 
importance of fruits and vegetables for Olympic 
athletes regardless of sport. 20 Few changes in sports 
nutrition occurred over the next 3 decades due 
to the outbreak of World War II and the limited 
methodologies available for metabolic and exercise 
physiology research. 
During the 1960s and 1970s, Swedish researchers 
demonstrated that CHO consumed during exercise 
could delay fatigue. Further, Ahlborg and colleagues 
found a direct relationship between a high-carbohydrate diet and endurance performance, thus starting 
the “carbo-loading” craze of the 1970s. 21 CHO continue 
to be the body’s preferred fuel source for endurance 
activities; however, recent publications suggest ketone bodies, a class of organic compounds that can 
be used for fuel, may be a superior fuel source for 
aerobic activity. 22,23 Ketone bodies are produced by the 
liver, derived from fat. Production is increased during 
periods of prolonged fasting or adherence to a strict 
ketogenic diet. 
Sports nutrition became a recognized field of study 
during the 1980s, coinciding with the increase in 
exercise physiology research. Early on, the majority 
of sports dietitians worked with endurance athletes 
due to their unique energy and CHO requirements. 
By the late 1990s, sports dietitians were becoming 
an integral part of collegiate, professional, and 
Olympic teams. In 2009, the American Dietetic Association, American College of Sports Medicine, 
and Dietitians of Canada released a joint position 
paper evaluating the totality of evidence regarding 
nutrition and athletic performance. 24 Recognized 
benefits of sports nutrition now apply to athletes 
from young to old, elite to recreational, civilian 
and military. Sports nutrition continues to expand 
into new fields. If one considers the warrior athlete 
paradigm, military applied nutrition is consistent 
with sports nutrition.
304
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
SCOPE OF PRACTICE
A registered dietitian (RD) who practices sports 
nutrition is commonly referred to as a sports RD. A 
sports RD may receive further credentialing from 
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics with a board 
certification as a specialist in sports dietetics (CSSD). 
CSSD eligibility includes meeting a minimum practice 
experience requirement (1,500 hours of specialty practice) and successfully passing a nationally accredited 
examination. Sports RDs implement evidence-based 
knowledge in physical activity and exercise/training 
to address the diverse nutritional needs of physically 
active individuals. A sports RD’s individual scope of 
practice includes assessment, diagnosis, intervention, 
monitoring, and evaluating of what, how much, and 
when to consume foods and fluids. 
Although individual client goals differ, general 
goals of sports RDs include maintenance of health, 
appropriate body weight and composition, and 
instruction on how to properly fuel the body for 
physical activity and exercise, training and conditioning, and physical performance. Sports RDs educate 
individuals regarding energy, nutrient, and fluid 
intake before, during, and after exercise, as well 
as on menu planning, recipe modification, grocery 
shopping, and food preparation and storage. Sports 
RDs facilitate behavior change and promote problem solving, adaptation, and progression toward 
achieving nutritional goals that promote overall 
health and wellness. Regularly, sports RDs evaluate 
dietary supplements for legality, safety, effectiveness, 
quality, and application to sport. Lastly, sports RDs 
provide guidance regarding compliance with the 
rules and regulations of sports organizations and 
governing bodies. 25 
KEY CONCEPTS
Nutrient Timing
Overall goals of training include optimization 
of physiologic and molecular adaptations. Training goals are realized when appropriate nutritional 
strategies are implemented before, during, and after 
training. “Nutrient timing” is the term originally 
coined by doctors John Ivy and Robert Portman26 to 
indicate that “when food is consumed” is as important as “what food is consumed.” Ivy and Portman 
describe nutrient timing as “a revolutionary new 
system of exercise nutrition that will allow you to 
build more strength and lean muscle mass in less 
time than ever before.”26 The three phases of nutrient 
Figure 21-1. The three major phases for nutrient timing: 
maintenance and growth, exercise, and the refueling interval 
for recovery. Heights of the bars are indicative of protein 
and carbohydrate balance; exercise indicates the breakdown 
of energy stores; the refueling interval reflects rebuilding 
energy stores; and maintenance represents homeostasis.
timing are shown in Figure 21-1: (1) during exercise; 
(2) the refueling interval immediately after exercise 
(recovery); and (3) the time between exercise sessions 
(maintenance and growth). 
Various strategies have been developed to maintain 
adequate energy stores, enhance recovery, stimulate 
muscle protein synthesis, maximize glycogen repletion, and minimize/protect against training injuries. 24 
Nutrient timing, combined with adequate rest and 
recovery periods, are important components to any 
training program. However, another consideration for 
optimal performance is familiarity: foods and fluids 
consumed before and during exercise should be consistent with those used in training to minimize possible 
gastric distress from unfamiliar foods. The overall 
goals of nutrient timing are noted in Exhibit 21-3.
EXHIBIT 21-3
GOALS OF NUTRIENT TIMING 
 
• Enhance performance.
 
• Accelerate recovery.
 
• Improve/maintain muscle integrity.
 
• Increase muscle mass/nitrogen balance.
 
• Replete glycogen stores.
 
• Prevent musculoskeletal injuries.
 
• Restore skeletal muscle integrity.
305
Performance Nutrition
Pre-Exercise Meal/Snack
No consensus statement for optimal content and 
timing of a pre-exercise meal or snack has been published. However, consuming a meal or snack providing 200 to 300 g of CHO 3 to 4 hours before heavy 
training or competition will allow sufficient time for 
the food to be digested and for gastric emptying to 
occur. Consuming up to 25 g of protein before exercise may be important for those primarily engaged in 
strength training to maximize training adaptations. 27 If 
a larger meal is desired, more time should be allowed 
for digestion. 
During Exercise
During exercise, energy stores are being used to 
provide energy to the working muscles and muscle 
protein is being broken down. Consuming small 
amounts of CHO at regular intervals can minimize 
metabolic distress and enhance athletic performance, 
especially when the exercise duration is longer than 
1 hour. 28 During exercise lasting longer than an hour, 
ingesting CHO in a fluid can also help sustain hydration. Studies have shown that ingesting 0. 7 g CHO 
per kilogram of bodyweight (approximately 30–60 g 
CHO/h or 7–20 g CHO every 15–20 min) can extend 
endurance performance. 27 When the exercise duration 
is greater than 3 hours, CHO intakes of up to 110 g 
per hour may be needed, depending on the intensity 
of the exercise. 29 For exercise longer than 3 hours, individuals typically eat both solid and liquid foods to 
meet CHO needs. 
Service members should try various foods during 
training to determine which are most suitable. The 
amount of CHO and fluid required and tolerated by 
any individual will be determined by the exercise intensity, duration, environmental conditions, and mode 
of exercise (running vs marching vs manual labor). 
The service member should simulate mission events to 
determine his or her optimal fuel sources. Consuming 
protein during events confers no discernable benefit. 30 
Recovery: Refueling Interval
After exercise, the metabolic environment within 
the body needs to transition from a catabolic state to 
an anabolic one to promote recovery and restore what 
was depleted during the exercise phase. This is the 
“refueling interval.” Release of insulin, an important 
hormone for inhibiting muscle protein breakdown, 
is stimulated by ingestion of both CHO and certain 
amino acids. 31 Thus, the recommended time to begin 
the refueling interval is no later than 60 minutes after 
activity, when glycogen stores and muscle protein 
synthesis are lowest; this provides the body with 
the requisite nutrients and fuels. To enhance muscle 
glycogen synthesis following prolonged, strenuous 
exercise (over 60 minutes), consuming approximately 
50 g of CHO within 60 minutes after the activity is 
recommended, followed by approximately 1. 0 to 1. 5 
g per kilogram of bodyweight (0. 5–0. 7g/lb) CHO (as 
liquid, gel, or solid food) at 2-hour intervals for up to 
6 hours. 24,27,28
Although somewhat controversial, it is generally 
believed that ingesting some protein (12–25 g) with 
CHO during recovery can increase muscle protein 
synthesis and improve nitrogen balance more effectively than consuming CHO without protein. 24,32 Consuming foods with essential amino acids—especially 
leucine—will promote the post-exercise muscle protein 
synthesis needed for building and repairing muscle 
tissue. 33,34 Foods containing leucine include eggs, dairy, 
and chicken. Without appropriate refueling after a 
hard training session or mission, performance may be 
compromised, especially if a second workout or mission is required the same day or in less than 24 hours.
Protein Requirements
The RDA for both men and women is 0. 80 g of 
high- quality protein per kilogram of body weight (or 
0. 36 g/lb body weight). 35 The recommendation is based 
on careful analyses of published nitrogen balance 
studies. The acceptable macronutrient distribution 
range for protein is 10% to 35% of total energy intake. 
Given that 1 g of protein is equivalent to 4 calories, on 
a 3,000-calorie diet, protein intake would be 75 g at 
10% and 262 g at 35% of the total energy. There is no 
upper intake level for protein due to insufficient data 
to define an upper limit. However, it must be remembered that amino acids are not good sources of energy. 
Protein recommendations for service members can be 
met through diet alone, without the use of protein or 
amino acid supplements (Table 21-1).
Dietary Supplements
According to the Dietary Supplement Health and 
Education Act of 1994, the term dietary supplement 
refers to “a product (other than tobacco) intended 
to supplement the diet that bears or contains one or 
more of the following dietary ingredients: a vitamin; 
a mineral; an herb or other botanical; an amino acid; 
a dietary substance for use by man to supplement the 
diet by increasing the total dietary intake; or a concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or combination 
of any ingredient.”36
306
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 21-1
PROTEIN RECOMMENDATIONS BASED ON 
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY LEVELS
Activity Level/
Conditions 
Grams/lb 
body weight
Grams/kg 
body weight
Low to moderate*
0. 4–0. 5
0. 8–1. 0
Endurance†
0. 5–0. 6
1. 2–1. 4
Strength‡
0. 5–0. 9
1. 2–2. 0
High energy demands 
combined with insufficient calories
0. 7–0. 9
1. 5–2. 0
*Low- to moderate-level activities include sitting quietly or engaging in light exercise such as a brisk walk, yoga, hiking, or softball.
†Endurance training is vigorous exercise that challenges the aerobic 
system. Examples include running, cycling, swimming, and sports 
such as basketball or racquetball. For endurance athletes, about 0. 5 
to 0. 6 g of protein per pound of body weight each day is sufficient 
to sustain events.
‡Strength training involves resistance exercise such as weight training, lifting heavy objects, and use of resistance bands. Typically 
the goal of muscle building is to increase lean body mass without 
gaining fat, so it’s important to eat right and maintain energy balance. About 0. 5 to 0. 9 g of protein per pound of body weight each 
day is enough protein for strength training, even for the hardcore 
bodybuilder, as long as energy intake is sufficient to support daily 
activities.
The use of dietary supplements has become increasingly popular among service members to enhance 
performance. Consumers of dietary supplements 
should be aware that although the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) regulates dietary supplements, the regulations are not as strict as they are for 
drugs. Consequently, some unsafe and contaminated 
products end up on the market. FDA has identified 
certain “high-risk” dietary supplement categories: 
bodybuilding, weight-loss, and sexual enhancement 
products; these products are more likely than vitamin 
and mineral supplements to contain unsafe and contaminated ingredients. In addition, many “high-risk” 
supplements may not conform to the labeling regulations required by FDA and may contain illegal (eg, 
analogues of drugs, amphetamines) or controlled (eg, 
steroids) substances. Such ingredients may be intentionally left off the label because they would not meet 
the definition of a dietary supplement. Thus, service 
members should be careful when purchasing dietary 
supplements. Operation Supplement Safety is a DoD 
initiative to educate all service members on how to 
select safe supplements (http://opss.org).
Supplements displaying seals from third-party 
verification/certification programs are better choices 
(Figure 21-2) because they are (a) unlikely to contain 
contaminants; (b) likely to have ingredients present 
in the amounts listed on the Supplement Facts panel; 
and (c) likely to have accurate labels. Service members should also be aware that (a) concentrations and 
combinations of ingredients are arbitrarily created 
by manufacturers with little to no supporting scientific research, and (b) using any dietary supplement, 
especially those in high-risk categories, increases the 
probability of experiencing an adverse event. Adverse 
events associated with dietary supplements can range 
from very mild physical discomfort to severe, lifethreatening incidents. Healthcare providers should 
report adverse events and should educate patients on 
how to report adverse events through Natural Medicines’ MedWatch website (http://naturalmedicines.
com/tools/natural-medwatch.aspx). Service members 
should always proceed with caution when considering 
and using dietary supplements. Primary care providers should query their patients about supplement use 
and discuss general safety issues with all patients.
Caffeine Dosing
Caffeine is the world’s most widely consumed 
psychoactive substance. Previous research on caffeine 
has demonstrated positive effects on several militaryFigure 21-2. Examples of logos and seals from organizations that third-party verify/certify dietary supplements. Reproduced 
with permission from each.
307
Performance Nutrition
relevant tasks including marksmanship, reaction time, 
vigilance, and logical reasoning. 37–41 In athletics, the 
ergogenic benefits of caffeine include improvements 
in endurance and time to exhaustion, and a reduction 
in perceived effort of exertion. Previous studies used 
a wide range of caffeine doses, ranging from 200 to 
400 mg or 3 to 5 mg per kilogram of body weight 
(1. 4–2. 3 mg/lb). 37–41 However, the ergogenic benefits 
of caffeine are dose-dependent, with adverse events 
often reported when intake exceeds 500 to 600 mg; the 
recommended dosing is 100 to 200 mg every 4 hours. 
Caffeine is provided in military rations in various 
forms, including some chewing gum, mints, applesauce, pudding, and mini First Strike bars. 
PERFORMANCE NUTRITION AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
Role of the Military Medical Officer
The military medical officer (MMO) must be a performance nutrition role model. The MMO should not 
only be familiar with concepts related to performance 
nutrition, but should also practice these concepts on a 
daily basis in front of subordinates and superiors alike. 
MMOs should be competent in key topics, including 
nutrient timing, macronutrient distribution, and strategic use of caffeine. Additionally, knowledge about 
service-specific and DoD regulations and guidance 
regarding healthy body weight and dietary supplements is critical. Lastly, the MMO is responsible for 
knowing where to obtain reliable information. 
Service-specific guidelines detail height, weight, 
and body composition standards required for all 
service members. Guidance is provided under Army 
Regulation 600-9,42 Air Force Instruction 36-2905,43 
Navy OPNAV Instruction 6110. 15J,44 Marine Corps 
Order 6110. 3,45 and DoDI 1308. 3. 46 
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
The commanding officer has the responsibility of 
understanding and promoting performance nutrition 
with regard to time and access to quality food. Further, 
the commanding officer should create an environment 
supportive of performance nutrition. Like the MMO, 
the commanding officer should model appropriate 
nutritional behaviors to subordinates. Additionally, 
the commanding officer needs to understand who he 
or she can contact for assistance on any issues related 
to performance nutrition and may rely on the MMO 
for information if a unit RD is not available. 
RESOURCES
Several electronic DoD resources are publicly 
available. The Consortium for Health and Military 
Performance (CHAMP) at the Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences hosts the Human 
Performance Resource Center (HPRC) (http://hprconline.org/). HPRC is a clearinghouse for evidencebased information regarding TFF and contains key 
resources to help service members and their families 
in all aspects of performance. HPRC is comprised of 
eight domains representing TFF, including physical 
fitness, environment, nutrition, family and relationships, and mental fitness. 47 
Operation Supplement Safety (OPSS) (http://
opss.org) is a DoD-wide effort, including partnerships with other government and professional organizations, to provide evidence-based, up-to-date 
information on dietary supplements. OPSS educates 
service members and retirees, their family members, 
leaders, healthcare providers, and DoD civilians 
about dietary supplements and gives them tools to 
be informed supplement users. OPSS has also partnered with the US Anti-Doping Agency to develop 
a dietary supplements high-risk list. The high-risk 
list is intended to help service members and DoD 
civilians identify supplements that might pose a 
risk to their health or career. Other good sources of 
information on supplements include the Academy 
of Nutrition and Dietetics (http://www.eatright.org) 
and the Office of Dietary Supplements (http://ods.
od.nih.gov/).
HPRC has partnered with the Natick Soldier Research, Development, and Engineering Center and the 
US Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine to host the Combat Rations Database (ComRaD) 
(https://www.hprc-online.org/page/combat-rationsdatabase-comrad). ComRaD is an interactive, educational website designed for visitors to view accurate, 
up-to-date nutritional information on individual 
combat ration menus (MREs, FSRs, and Meal Cold 
Weather/Long Range Patrol), group rations (Unitized 
Group Ration-A and Unitized Group Ration Heat & 
Serve), and an enhancement pack (Modular Operational Ration Enhancement), as well as the individual food 
components packed inside them. ComRaD enables 
service members, military RDs, food service officers, 
and leaders to learn about the nutritional content of 
their combat rations and use this information to help 
with fueling for optimal performance.
308
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
The National Academies of Sciences’ Engineering 
and Medicine Health and Medicine Division, formerly 
the Institute of Medicine, is an independent, nonprofit 
organization that works outside of government 
to provide unbiased and authoritative advice to 
decision-makers and the public. The division focuses 
on asking and answering the nation’s most relevant 
questions regarding health and healthcare. All 
Engineering and Medicine Health and Medicine 
Division reports are available electronically (http://
www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports.aspx) at 
no cost. Hundreds of reports are available on a variety 
of topics from food and nutrition to public health, 
diseases, and veterans’ health. 
Nutrition and Menu Standards for Human Performance Optimization11 details the unique nutrition 
requirements of service members known as MDRIs. 
The MDRIs are based on DRI updates from the 
Food and Nutrition Board. Differences in nutritional requirements based on height, weight, gender, 
level of physical activity, and environmental factors 
including cold environments, hot environments, 
and altitude are discussed within the regulation. 
Compliance with this regulation is required for all 
food service operations including the DoD Combat 
Feeding Program. 11
The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) provides a multitude of resources to consumers on a variety of topics related to nutrition. The USDA and HHS 
are responsible for developing the Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans,48 which encourages Americans to eat a 
healthful diet; MyPlate (https://www.choosemyplate.
gov/),49 a visual depiction of how eat according to the 
Dietary Guidelines; and SuperTracker (https://www.
supertracker.usda.gov/),50 a free online food and activity tracking program. The Academy of Nutrition and 
Dietetics (http://www.eatright.org) also provides free 
publications and electronic resources.
SUMMARY
Military nutrition has always been associated with 
safety, health, readiness, and performance. Nutrition 
plays a vital role in every aspect of life: sleep, mood, 
physical and cognitive performance, sense of purpose, 
and health. The activities of service members are often 
unique and vary greatly from the general population, 
particularly with regard to environmental exposures 
and physical activity. Service members must be well 
nourished to remain healthy and fit for service. Today, 
developing, implementing and evaluating effective 
nutritional strategies to optimize performance before, 
during, and after training and operations remains 
a high priority for the DoD. Consistent messaging 
surrounding nutrition must encompass performance 
nutrition, health promotion, dietary supplements, 
and optimal fuel choices in dining facilities and other 
fueling environments. To support nutrition efforts, the 
DoD has intricately woven components of nutrition 
into several important policy documents. Support 
from MMOs and commanding officers is mission 
critical and will drive successful implementation of 
performance nutrition.
REFERENCES
 
1. Butterwick RF. Impact of nutrition on ageing the process. Bridging the gap: the animal perspective. Br J Nutr. 
2015;113(Suppl):S23–25.
 
2. Frazier-Wood AC. Dietary patterns, genes, and health: challenges and obstacles to be overcome. Curr Nutr Rep. 
2015;4:82–87.
 
3. Hale MW, Spencer SJ, Conti B, et al. Diet, behavior and immunity across the lifespan. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2015;58:46–
52.
 
4. US Department of Defense. DoD Nutrition Committee. Washington, DC: DoD; 2011. DoD Instruction 6130. 05.
 
5. Murlin JR, Miller CW. Preliminary results of nutritional surveys in United States Army camps. Am J Pub Health. 
1919;9(6):401–413. 
 
6. National Research Council, Food and Nutrition Board. The Food and Nutrition Board: 1940-1965: Twenty-Five Years in 
Retrospect. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, NRC;1966.
 
7. Hill N, Fallowfield J, Price S, Wilson D. Military nutrition: maintaining health and rebuilding injured tissue. Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2011;366(1562):231–240.
309
Performance Nutrition
 
8. Rose A. Napoleon’s Campaign in Russia, Anno 1812, Medico-Historical. New York, NY: A Rose; 1913.
 
9. US Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center Combat Feeding Directorate. An overview of 
us military rations: yesterday, today, and tomorrow. Updated March 7, 2010. http://hotchow.natick.army.mil/history/
Historical_Rations.pdf. Accessed November 24, 2017.
 10. U.S Army Research, Development, and Engineering Command. Operational Rations of the Department of Defense. 9th 
ed. Natick, MA: RDECOM; 2012. Natick Pamphlet 30-25.
 11. US Department of the Army. Nutrition and Menu Standards for Human Performance Optimization. Washington, DC: DoD; 
2017. Army Regulation 40-25, OPNAV Instruction 10110. 1, Marine Corps Order 10110. 49, Air Force Instruction 44-141.
 12. National Research Council. Committee on Military Nutrition Research: Activity Report 1994-1999. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1999.
 13. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Publications. http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/
Reports.aspx?sa.x=0&sa.y=0&sa=Search&site=iom_reports&client=iom_frontend&output=xml_no_dtd&filters=inme
ta:activity%3DMilitary+Nutrition+Research&getfields=nap_id.description.report_date&sort=date:D:R:d1&filter=0&i
e=UTF-8&ip=216. 230. 117. 99&access=p&entqr=3&entqrm=0&wc=200&wc_mc=1&q=site:nationalacademies.org/hmd+
inmeta:activity%3DMilitary%2520Nutrition%2520Research&dnavs=inmeta:activity%3DMilitary%2520Nutrition%25
20Research&ulang=&q=(filetype:html+%7C+filetype:aspx+)&start=0. Accessed February 2, 2018.
 14. National Research Council. Recommended Dietary Allowances. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1941. https://
doi.org/10. 17226/13286. Accessed February 2, 2018.
 15. Harper AE. Origin of Recommended dietary allowances—an historic overview. Am J Clin Nutr. 1985;41(1):140–148.
 16. Sheffer M, Taylor CL. Development of DRIs 1994-2004: Lessons Learned and New Challenges: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2008.
 17. Atkinson SA. Defining the process of dietary reference intakes: framework for the United States and Canada. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 2011;94(2):655s–657s.
 18. Laertius D. The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers. London, England: GH Bohn; 1853.
 19. Applegate EA, Grivetti LE. Search for the competitive edge: a history of dietary fads and supplements. J Nutr. 1997;127(5 
Suppl):869s–873s.
 20. Grivetti LE, Applegate EA. From Olympia to Atlanta: a cultural-historical perspective on diet and athletic training. J 
Nutr. 1997;127(5 Suppl):860s–868s.
 21. Ahlborg B, Bergström J, Ekelund L-G, Hultman E. Muscle glycogen and muscle electrolytes during prolonged physical 
exercise. Acta Physiol Scand. 1967;70(2):129–142.
 22. Cox PJ, Clarke K. Acute nutritional ketosis: implications for exercise performance and metabolism. Extrem Physiol 
Med. 2014;3:17.
 23. Volek JS, Noakes T, Phinney SD. Rethinking fat as a fuel for endurance exercise. Eur J Sport Sci. 2015;15(1):13–20.
 24. Rodriguez NR, Di Marco NM, Langley S. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Nutrition and athletic 
performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41(3):709–731.
 25. Steinmuller PL, Kruskall LJ, Karpinski CA, Manore MM, Macedonio MA, Meyer NL. Academy of nutrition and dietetics: revised 2014 standards of practice and standards of professional performance for registered dietitian nutritionists 
(competent, proficient, and expert) in sports nutrition and dietetics. J Acad Nutr Diet. Apr 2014;114(4):631-641.e643.
 26. Ivy JL, Portman R. Nutrient Timing: The Future of Sports Nutrition. Laguna Beach, CA: Basic Health Publications, Inc.; 
2004: 449.
310
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 27. Kerksick C, Harvey T, Stout J, et al. International Society of Sports Nutrition position stand: nutrient timing. J Int Soc 
Sports Nutr. 2008;5:17.
 28. Burke LM. Fueling strategies to optimize performance: training high or training low? Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2010;20(Suppl 2):48–58.
 29. Stellingwerff T, Cox GR. Systematic review: Carbohydrate supplementation on exercise performance or capacity of 
varying durations. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2014;39(9):998–1011.
 30. McLellan TM, Pasiakos SM, Lieberman HR. Effects of protein in combination with carbohydrate supplements on acute 
or repeat endurance exercise performance: a systematic review. Sports Med. 2014;44(4):535–550.
 31. Martinez-Lagunas V, Ding Z, Bernard JR, Wang B, Ivy JL. Added protein maintains efficacy of a low-carbohydrate 
sports drink. J Strength Cond Res. 2010;24(1):48–59.
 32. Howarth KR, Phillips SM, MacDonald MJ, Richards D, Moreau NA, Gibala MJ. Effect of glycogen availability on human skeletal muscle protein turnover during exercise and recovery. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010;109(2):431–438.
 33. Pasiakos SM, McClung HL, McClung JP, et al. Leucine-enriched essential amino acid supplementation during moderate steady state exercise enhances postexercise muscle protein synthesis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;94(3):809–818.
 34. Pasiakos SM, McClung JP. Supplemental dietary leucine and the skeletal muscle anabolic response to essential amino 
acids. Nutr Rev. 2011;69(9):550–557.
 35. Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, 
Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids (Macronutrients). Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 2005. 
 36. Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994. Pub L No. 103-417. https://www.congress.gov/bill/103rdcongress/senate-bill/784. Accessed February 2, 2018.
 37. Brunye TT, Mahoney CR, Lieberman HR, Giles GE, Taylor HA. Acute caffeine consumption enhances the executive 
control of visual attention in habitual consumers. Brain Cogn. 2010;74(3):186–192.
 38. Judelson DA, Preston AG, Miller DL, Munoz CX, Kellogg MD, Lieberman HR. Effects of theobromine and caffeine 
on mood and vigilance. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;33(4):499–506.
 39. Kamimori GH, McLellan TM, Tate CM, Voss DM, Niro P, Lieberman HR. Caffeine improves reaction time, vigilance 
and logical reasoning during extended periods with restricted opportunities for sleep. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2015;232:2031–2042.
 40. Lieberman HR, Stavinoha T, McGraw S, White A, Hadden L, Marriott BP. Caffeine use among active duty US Army 
soldiers. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;112(6):902–912, 912.e901-904.
 41. Tharion WJ, Shukitt-Hale B, Lieberman HR. Caffeine effects on marksmanship during high-stress military training 
with 72 hour sleep deprivation. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2003;74(4):309–314.
 42. US Department of the Army. The Army Body Composition Program. Washington, DC: DA; 2013. Army Regulation 600-9. 
 43. US Department of the Air Force. Air Force Fitness Program. Washington, DC: DAF; 2013. Air Force Instruction 36-2905.
 44. US Department of the Navy. Physical Readiness Program. Washington, DC: DN; 2011. OPNAV Instruction 6110. 1J.
 45. US Department of the Navy. Marine Corps Body Composition and Military Appearance Program. Washington, DC: DN; 
2008. Marine Corps Order 6110. 3.
 46. US Department of Defense. DoD Physical Fitness and Body Fat Programs Procedures. Washington, DC: DoD; 2002. DoD 
Instruction 1308. 3
311
Performance Nutrition
 47. Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences. Human Performance Resource Center. http://hprc-online.org/. 
Accessed May 6, 2015.
 48. US Department of Agriculture. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015–2020. 8th ed. Washington, DC: DoA; 2015.
 49. US Department of Agriculture. ChooseMyPlate.gov. http://www.choosemyplate.gov/. Accessed May 6, 2015.
 50. US Department of Agriculture. SuperTracker. https://www.supertracker.usda.gov/. Accessed May 6, 2015.
312
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
