531
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
Chapter 35
CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, RADIOLOGICAL, NUCLEAR, AND EXPLOSIVE 
THREATS 
EDWARD LUCCI, MD,* and MELISSA GIVENS, MD, MPH†
INTRODUCTION 
CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS
General Principles of Chemical Casualty Care 
Personal Protective Equipment 
Vesicants 
Nerve Agents
Lung-Damaging Toxic Industrial Chemicals
Cyanide
Incapacitating Agents
Riot-Control Agents
Overview of Decontamination
Patient Decontamination Site 
BIOLOGIC WARFARE AGENTS
Bacterial Agents
Viral Agents
Biological Toxins
RADIOLOGICAL AND NUCLEAR EXPOSURES
Radiation Effects
External Exposure 
Triage and Treatment of Radiation-Injured Patients 
Internal Exposure
EXPLOSIVE (BLAST) INJURIES
Mechanisms of Blast Injury 
Evaluation and Management of Primary Blast Injury
CONCLUSION
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army; Chief, Department of Emergency Medicine, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, 
Maryland
†Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army; Associate Professor, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
532
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, 
and explosive (CBRNE) threat to the US military has 
changed dramatically in recent years due to advancing technological platforms associated with computers, drones, robotics, genetics, and synthetic biology. 
These changes have created an environment in which 
individuals, groups, or states can pose an almost invisible threat anywhere around the world. Innovative 
technologies that empower great good can also be used 
to inflict great harm. It is reasonable to anticipate that 
groups that used airplanes like missiles might use toxic 
industrial chemicals (TICs) like conventional chemical weapons, an emerging infection like a biological 
weapon, or radioactive isotopes to spread harm or terror, if they could gain access to them. While encountering conventional casualties on the battlefield remains 
a more likely scenario for today’s military medical 
officer (MMO) due to the increased accessibility of 
conventional weapons, the MMO must also remain 
vigilant for unusual scenarios that might represent 
the first clue that a CBRNE incident has occurred in a 
military or civilian population. Because environmental 
sampling for agent detection and rapid point-of-care 
testing for agent identification will not be routinely 
available to most MMOs in the austere environment or 
most hospital settings, the initial suspicion of a CBRNE 
attack will rest on clinical recognition of signs and 
symptoms of poisoning, infection, or injury. 
Distinguishing a biological, chemical, or radiological weapons attack from that of an emerging infection 
or toxic industrial accident will be difficult and outside 
the normal experience of most MMOs. Regardless, 
today’s MMO must remain alert to the possibility and 
be prepared to recognize military or civilian CBRNE 
casualties of warfare or terrorism. This chapter will 
focus on key principles of CBRNE incident recognition 
and casualty management, emphasizing relevance to 
the MMO.
CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS
During the morning rush hour at 8 am on March 20, 
1995, in the heart of Tokyo, five small bags of dilute 
sarin nerve agent were simultaneously dropped in 
subway cars and punctured with umbrellas as the cars 
were converging under a hub of government buildings. It appeared as if someone dropped plastic bags 
with water on the subway car floors. That morning, 
the terrorist attack by the Aum Shinrikyo cult sent 
thousands of terrified Japanese, with varying degrees 
of nerve agent vapor poisoning, to the local healthcare 
system within minutes, and brought the city of Tokyo 
to a standstill. Ultimately, 12 people died, at least 5,500 
victims presented for care, and almost one-quarter of 
the nearest hospital’s staff became secondary victims. 
St Luke’s Hospital received 640 victims that day because of news reports that it had the antidote. 1 
Less than a year earlier, in Matsumoto, Japan, the 
same cult had launched a sarin attack into the open air 
using an electric heater fan to direct nerve agent vapor 
toward a targeted apartment. Eight people died and 
660 were injured in the first terrorist attack using sarin 
nerve agent on the general public.
Chemical warfare agents are toxic substances developed for military use to produce death, serious 
injury, or incapacitation. They may exist as solids, 
liquids, or gases, but most are stored as liquids and 
dispersed as a liquid or aerosol. TICs are industrially 
manufactured chemicals that could be used to produce 
mass casualties; some were used as chemical agents on 
the battlefield in World War I. Incapacitating agents 
and riot-control agents are chemical agents designed 
only to produce temporary effects without serious 
sequelae. 
The modern use of chemical warfare agents dates to 
World War I, when the first chemical agent employed 
on the battlefield was chlorine gas and the most effective was sulfur mustard. Chemical weapons were 
not used in World War II. The United States and the 
former Soviet Union (USSR) both signed the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and agreed to destroy chemical 
weapons stockpiles beginning in 1990. 2 More than 31 
countries and some terrorist groups possess chemical 
weapons, and many more are seeking to obtain them. 3 
Since the 1980s there have been multiple instances of 
chemical weapons use on the battlefield, against civilian populations, and in terrorist attacks. The Iraqi military used both nerve agent and mustard against Iran 
during the 1980–1988 Iran-Iraq war, and widespread 
use of toxic chemical weapons has been reported in 
the 2011–present Syrian civil war. 4,5 Because the threat 
remains high, MMOs have a critical responsibility to 
competently identify and manage chemical casualties 
in any setting.
The major categories of lethal traditional chemical 
warfare agents include: vesicants, nerve agents, lungdamaging (pulmonary) agents, TICs, and cyanide. 
Nonlethal agent categories include incapacitating 
agents and riot-control agents. It is important for the 
MMO to recognize several general features of chemical agents:
533
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
 
1. Each chemical warfare agent category requires similar treatment. 
 
2. An act of chemical warfare or terrorism is 
likely to involve substances that cannot immediately be identified; real-time testing will 
be difficult; and the window for effective 
therapy will likely be narrow.
 
3. A chemical attack will be more easily recognizable when a group of exposed persons 
have rapid onset of comparable symptoms. 6 
General Principles of Chemical Casualty Care 
General principles of chemical casualty care for the 
MMO to consider include identifying chemical threat 
agents and all exposed patients, protecting medical 
staff, ensuring proper triage, recognizing the need for 
decontamination (if liquid contamination is present), 
managing medical treatment and antidote availability, 
and ensuring proper patient disposition (evacuation 
or return to duty). For patients, treatment begins with 
removal from chemical exposure and decontamination. Persons who suspect they have been exposed 
should remove and bag their clothing and shower 
thoroughly with soap and water as soon as possible. 
Removing contaminated clothing can eliminate 85% 
to 90% of trapped chemical substances. 6 The MMO 
must appreciate that the majority of affected patients 
will be minimally exposed and reach medical facilities through their own efforts, so medical treatment 
facilities must make advanced preparation to handle 
ambulatory decontamination and provide psychological support to casualties. 
Clinical signs of severe chemical exposure include 
altered mental status, airway obstruction, respiratory 
distress, cardiovascular instability, and seizures. Initial 
supportive treatment for casualties should be focused 
on airway management, maintaining ventilation and 
circulatory support, and administering antidote, if 
available, while simultaneously assessing for burns, 
trauma, and other injuries. Atropine, pralidoxime, 
cyanide antidote kits, hydroxocobalamin, diazepam, 
and Reactive Skin Decontamination Lotion (RSDL) are 
the most important drugs to stockpile for the treatment 
of chemical casualties. 7
 Personal Protective Equipment
The MMO managing contaminated patients with 
liquid exposure must ensure medical staff wear proper 
chemical protective clothing until the patient is decontaminated. The M40 Chemical-Biological Field Mask 
represents the latest generation of protective mask 
issued by the US military. When properly worn, the 
M40 mask will protect from all known chemical, biological, and riot-control agents. 8 The addition of the 
chemical/biological hood affords additional protection 
to the head, neck, and shoulders. Filtration is provided 
by one C2A1 filter canister mounted on either cheek. 
The new M50 Joint Service General Protective Mask 
(JSGPM), designed to replace the M40, is the first 
joint service model. The JSGPM provides improved 
vision and protection against nuclear, biological, and 
chemical threats, including designated TICs, with the 
M61 filter. 9 The chemical protective glove set consists 
of an outer butyl rubber glove for chemical protection 
and an inner cotton glove for perspiration absorption. 
The green or black vinyl over-boots are worn over 
combat boots and provide protection from chemical 
and biological agents and radioactive particles (alpha 
and beta) for a limited time. The Joint Service Lightweight Integrated Suit Technology (JSLIST) Chemical 
& Biological Protective Garment, a two-piece suit lined 
with carbon beads, provides 24 hours of protection 
against known biological and chemical agents and 
toxins in solid, liquid, or vapor form, and alpha and 
beta radioactive particles. 9 It should be worn in military 
environments under threat of nuclear, biological, or 
chemical attack. 
Vesicants 
Vesicants (“blister agents”) are agents that cause 
chemical burns. To the MMO, sulfur mustard or mustard (NATO designation H or HD) is the most important vesicant and is still considered a major military 
threat agent. It has been the most frequent chemical 
weapon used militarily since 1917, and was responsible 
for most of the chemical casualties in World War I. 10 
Mustard is stored and deployed as a persistent liquid 
agent and constitutes both a liquid and vapor threat 
to exposed skin and mucous membranes. 11 Accidental 
exposure from old military ordinance has occurred. 12,13
Mustard may be detected by multiple military 
detection devices including chemical agent monitors 
and detection papers. 11 Routine clinical lab testing 
for mustard in blood does not exist, but a metabolite, 
thiodiglycol, may be detected in blister fluid or urine, 
and advanced analyses of blood samples have verified 
human exposure to mustard. 10,13
Properly wearing the full chemical protective mask 
and ensemble affords full protection against vesicants 
like mustard. The activated charcoal in the mask filters 
and over-garment absorbs mustard. The butyl rubber 
in the chemical protective gloves and boots is impermeable to mustard. 14 
Mustard liquid is absorbed through skin within 
minutes and rapidly distributed throughout the 
534
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
body. 10 While the exact mechanism of action of mustard is unknown, its effects are delayed, appearing 
hours after exposure. Mustard vapor is extremely 
irritating to the eyes, skin, and airways. Burning or 
pain may begin anywhere from 2 to 48 hours after 
exposure. Initial skin injury resembles sunburn, which 
may progress to blister formation. Blister fluid does not 
contain mustard and is not a contamination risk. 10 The 
earliest effects from mustard involving the airway will 
be burning of the nares, sinus pain, sore throat, and 
hoarseness. Injury to the upper airways may lead to 
cough and laryngitis. Damage descends to the lower 
airways in a dose-dependent fashion. 11 The terminal 
airways and alveoli are usually not affected, and pulmonary edema is rarely present. 15 
The MMO must appreciate that no specific antidote 
for mustard exists; therefore, early decontamination is 
critical. To be effective in the management of mustard 
casualties, decontamination must be carried out immediately in the field to prevent injury and further 
exposure. Unfortunately, patients usually present 
when pain and lesions develop, hours after exposure. 
Management may be simple or complex, and the extent 
and severity of injury is dose-dependent. Although 
lethality from mustard exposure is low, MMOs must 
be aware that most casualties will require some form 
of extended medical care. 10 Dermal injuries may be 
managed with standard chemical burn care. 11 Early 
treatment should be focused on keeping the casualty 
comfortable, maintaining oxygenation, and preventing 
infection. Severe eye injuries and vision loss are rare 
from mustard exposure, and most casualties who lose 
their vision due to mustard exposure can be safely 
reassured they will fully recover their eyesight. 10 Significant respiratory effects within 4 hours of exposure 
signify a severe poisoning and poor prognosis. 11
Nerve Agents
The MMO must recognize that the nerve agents GA 
(tabun), GB (sarin), GD (soman), GF, and VX are the 
most toxic chemical warfare agents and are considered 
major military threats. They are hazards in both liquid 
and vapor states and can cause death within minutes 
after exposure. The only known battlefield use of nerve 
agent occurred during the Iran-Iraq War; however, 
there have been multiple episodes of use against civilian populations, most notably the 1995 Tokyo subway 
terrorist attack with the nerve agent sarin. Many countries have the technology to manufacture nerve agents, 
and weapons stockpiles remain major concerns. 
Nerve agents are potent organophosphate acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors, causing cholinergic 
overstimulation and a clinical syndrome called “cholinergic crisis”(Table 35-1). Most exposures occur via 
inhalation or through the skin. The attachment of 
nerve agent to the AChE enzyme is permanent unless removed by medical therapy. 16 The MMO should 
consider nerve agent poisoning in instances of terrorism when multiple persons suddenly collapse with 
TABLE 35-1
EFFECTS OF NERVE AGENTS IN HUMANS (CHOLINERGIC TOXIDROME)
Body Part or System
Effect (“DUMBBELLS”)
Skin and sweat glands
Diaphoresis
Urinary tract
Urination
Eye
Miosis (unilateral or bilateral), pain in or around the eye; complaints of dim or blurred vision
Nose
Rhinorrhea
Pulmonary tract
Bronchorrhea and Bronchospasm cough; complaints of tight chest, shortness of breath; wheezing on exam
Gastrointestinal tract
Emesis and Loose stools; increase in secretions and motility; nausea, vomiting, diarrhea; complaints of abdominal cramps, pain
Mouth
Lacrimation and Salivation
Muscular
Fasciculations (“rippling”), local or generalized; twitching of muscle groups; flaccid paralysis; 
complaints of twitching, weakness
Cardiovascular
Decrease or increase in heart rate; usually increase in blood pressure
Central nervous 
system
Acute effects of severe exposure: loss of consciousness, convulsion (or seizures after muscular 
paralysis), depression of respiratory center to produce apnea
535
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
TABLE 35-2
EFFECTS OF EXPOSURE TO NERVE AGENT 
VAPOR
Exposure Level
Effects*
Small (local effects)
Miosis, rhinorrhea, slight bronchoconstriction, secretions (slight dyspnea)
Moderate (local 
effects)
Miosis, rhinorrhea, slight bronchoconstriction, secretions (moderate to 
marked dyspnea)
Large
Miosis, rhinorrhea, slight bronchoconstriction, secretions (moderate to 
marked dyspnea), loss of consciousness, convulsions (seizures), generalized fasciculations, flaccid paralysis, 
apnea, micturition/defecation possible with seizures
*Onset of effects occurs within seconds to several minutes after 
exposure.
apnea, seizures, or coma. The initial effects of nerve 
agent, which may begin within seconds, depend on 
the dose and route of exposure; the severity of clinical effects are dose-dependent. Exposure to a small 
amount of nerve agent vapor causes effects on the 
eyes, nose, and airways. Miosis, often accompanied 
by eye pain, blurred vision, and nausea, is a characteristic finding in nerve agent vapor exposure to the 
eyes. 16 Rhinorrhea is characteristic of nasal airway 
vapor exposure, as is chest tightness, bronchoconstriction, and increased secretions. Exposure to a 
large amount of nerve agent vapor will cause rapidly 
cascading symptoms in minutes, culminating in loss 
of consciousness, convulsions, apnea, and muscle 
flaccidity (Table 35-2). 16 
Standard military chemical agent monitors and 
chemical agent paper will detect nerve agent. 14 The 
protective mask and chemical protective ensemble affords full protection. Butyl rubber gloves and boots are 
impermeable to nerve agents. Pyridostigmine bromide 
is a safe command-authorized military pretreatment 
against soman exposure. It is not an antidote and must 
be taken before exposure. 16
Medical management includes decontamination 
for liquid exposure, ventilation, antidotal treatment, 
and supportive care. Removal of clothing is adequate 
to prevent exposure to trapped vapor. The need for 
ventilation will be obvious. 17 Three drugs are used 
to treat nerve agent exposure: atropine, pralidoxime 
chloride, and diazepam. The Antidote Treatment 
Nerve Agent Auto-injector (ATNAA) contains atropine and pralidoxime chloride. 17 Pralidoxime chloride 
should never be withheld out of concern it may be 
too late after exposure. 16 Convulsant Antidote, Nerve 
Agent (CANA) contains diazepam. Benzodiazepines 
are the only effective anticonvulsants for nerve agent 
poisoning and should be administered to all patients 
with severe intoxication. 16 Casualties with severe 
symptoms should be triaged as immediate and receive 
three ATNAAs and one CANA. 17 Casualties exposed 
to liquid nerve agent may worsen. Casualties who 
are walking and talking and no longer being exposed 
may be triaged as minimal. 17 Laboratory testing to 
confirm nerve agent exposure is based on measuring 
the level of AChE inhibition, rather than testing for 
parent nerve agent. 18
Lung-Damaging Toxic Industrial Chemicals
On the night of December 2, 1984, during floor 
cleaning at the Union Carbide pesticide plant in Bhopal, India, water contacted a tank of methyl isocyanate, 
resulting in an exothermic reaction and explosion. 
Within an hour, 40 tons of the chemical had vaporized 
and leaked out into the night air. Heavier than air, the 
vapor cloud settled along the ground and drifted into 
the surrounding densely populated slums. Over the 
next day, the dead and dying arrived by truckloads 
at local hospitals, and within 48 hours, 8,000 people 
had died and about 200,000 people were injured in the 
largest TIC disaster to date. 19 
Today’s MMO should recognize that the greatest 
chemical threat has shifted from structured military offensive capabilities to accidental or intentional release 
of TICs, such as in the Bhopal disaster. 2,20 Chlorine and 
phosgene, two of the first chemical weapons used on 
the battlefield, are commonly used industrial chemicals today. Hundreds of TICs are used in industrial 
sites, publicly stored, and transported. To the military, 
lung-damaging TICs released on the battlefield as an 
aerosol, vapor, or gas are primarily an inhalational 
threat. When dispersed, they are usually heavier than 
air and hang close to the ground. TICs that commonly 
pose a military threat include: phosgene (CG), chlorine 
(Cl), oxides of nitrogen (NOx), hexachloroethane (HC) 
smoke, ammonia, and perfluoroisobutylene (PFIB). 20 
The military protective mask and filter will protect 
against some TICs, but not all. Specific filters or selfcontained breathing apparatuses are mandated for 
certain TICs, such as ammonia. In addition, the protective mask is not effective in environments where TICs 
displace oxygen, creating a low oxygen environment. 14 
The severity of a TIC exposure is based on multiple factors, including the substance involved and its 
concentration, the duration of exposure, whether the 
536
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
exposure occurred within a confined space, whether 
there was loss of consciousness, and whether underlying lung disease is present. Some TICs act preferentially on the central airway compartment (upper airway), some act preferentially on the peripheral airway 
compartment (lower airway), and some act on both 
compartments (Figure 35-1). In large doses, TICs affect 
both central and peripheral airway compartments.
The clinical effects from centrally acting agents 
such as ammonia are immediate and include irritated 
upper airways manifested by nasopharynx, oropharynx, and larynx inflammation, resulting in sinus pain, 
painful swallowing, hoarseness, sensation of choking, 
stridor, and laryngospasm. 21 The onset of the clinical 
effects of peripherally acting agents such as phosgene 
is delayed, usually for hours. Toxicity may include irritation to the lower airways manifested by coughing 
and shortness of breath, followed by the development 
of pulmonary edema with production of clear foamy 
sputum. 21 A shortened latency period portends a more 
severe exposure and worse prognosis. 
Medical management includes terminating exposure, which may include decontamination of any 
liquid on skin and removal of clothing to prevent 
further exposure from trapped vapors. There are 
no commonly available laboratory tests for the 
specific identification of lung-damaging agents. 21 
Rest after exposure is critical. Physical activity in a 
symptomatic patient may precipitate acute clinical 
deterioration. 20 Treatment is supportive; supplemental oxygen is indicated along with bronchodilators 
for bronchospasm. 
These patients can dramatically deteriorate after an 
initial latency period. Symptomatic patients require 
a period of observation with particular attention to 
airway management and treatment of pulmonary 
edema. Patients with hoarseness, stridor, upper-airway 
burns, or altered mental status may require endotracheal intubation. Patients with known exposure will 
require a period of observation of anywhere from 12 
to 48 hours, depending on their presenting symptoms. 
Patients who remain asymptomatic 8 hours after 
exposure are unlikely to develop acute lung injury. 21 
Patients presenting with shortness of breath can only 
be returned to duty at 48 hours, if physical exam and 
objective data are normal. 21 
Cyanide
There is no military use for cyanide. 22 The primary 
threat from cyanide for the MMO is its use as a toxic vapor deployed in an enclosed space. Forms of cyanide, 
such as hydrogen cyanide (AC) and cyanogen chloride 
(CK), are rapidly acting and highly lethal inhalational 
agents in high concentration. Cyanides are ubiquitous 
substances with widespread industrial use. Standard 
military field detection equipment can detect cyanide, 
and the chemical protective mask is fully protective 
against cyanide vapor. 14
The most important route of cyanide exposure is via 
inhalation, after which it will be readily absorbed and 
rapidly distributed throughout the body. Cyanide interferes with oxygen transport and cellular respiration, 
thereby causing tissue hypoxia, anaerobic metabolism, 
and severe metabolic acidosis.
Cyanide should be suspected when a laboratory or 
industrial worker, or a group of individuals, suddenly 
collapse. The organs most susceptible to cyanide are 
the central nervous system and the heart. The MMO 
will find few and nonspecific physical findings, such 
as anxiety, agitation, vertigo, and feelings of weakness, 
followed by sudden loss of consciousness, convulsions, 
and apnea. 23 Classically described findings are severe 
respiratory distress in an acyanotic individual with 
“cherry-red” skin. 22 The hallmarks of severe cyanide 
toxicity are persistent hypotension and acidemia (lactic acidosis) despite adequate arterial oxygenation. 
Confirmatory lab tests for cyanide are not rapidly 
available, and while they exist, the turnaround time 
for test results is generally not rapid enough to support diagnostic use. 22 An MMO can expect to see anion 
gap metabolic acidosis from severe lactic acidosis in 
significant cyanide poisoning. 23
Central
Peripheral
Trachea
Larynx
Bronchiole
Lung
Bronchus
Figure 35-1. Airway compartments: central and peripheral.
Graphic courtesy of: US Army Medical Research Institute 
of Chemical Defense.
537
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
Dermal decontamination is unnecessary in vapor 
exposures. Treatment begins with administering 
100% oxygen and general supportive care. Severely 
symptomatic patients should be considered for specific 
antidotal therapy, either in a two-step process involving infusions of sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate, 
or with a single infusion of hydroxocobalamin (vitamin B12a), if available, to chelate cyanide. 22 While 
hyperbaric oxygen may be beneficial, it is not readily 
available, particularly in a mass exposure setting. For 
the MMO in the deployed setting, most inhalational 
exposure casualties who survive long enough to reach 
medical care will need little treatment.
Incapacitating Agents
Incapacitating agents cause impairments that 
are temporary and nonlethal. There are two known 
chemicals of concern: BZ, a synthetic glycolate anticholinergic compound aerosolized as a solid particle, 
and Agent 15, a compound speculated to be identical 
or similar to BZ. 24 These agents act as competitive inhibitors of acetylcholine with resulting effects that are 
generally the opposite of nerve agent poisoning. The 
United States has developed and stockpiled BZ, and 
it is reported that Iraq has stockpiled large amounts 
of Agent 15. 25
BZ is dispersed as an odorless, non-irritating aerosolized solid. 25 It is primarily a respiratory threat, but 
it is also a risk via ingestion or absorption through 
the skin. 24 The characteristic of BZ that makes it incapacitating rather than toxic is its high safety ratio. 24 
The high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter of the 
chemical protective mask prevents exposure to BZ. 14 
There is no current detection capability fielded. 24
BZ intoxication causes classic anticholinergic symptoms that can be divided into peripheral effects, such 
as mydriasis, blurred vision, dry mouth, and dry skin, 
and central nervous system effects, such as altered 
level of consciousness, delusions, hallucinations, 
slurred speech, disorientation in time and place, and 
behavioral lability (from quietness to restlessness to 
combativeness). 25 BZ also produces shared illusions 
and hallucinations in groups. 24 The onset of symptoms 
depends on the dose and route of exposure. Symptoms 
may last 3 to 4 days. 24 
Medical management should focus on decontamination of skin and clothing, confiscation of weapons or 
similar items from the patient to prevent injuries from 
erratic behavior, and observation. The MMO should 
prioritize physical restraint, managing heat stress, 
control of symptoms with benzodiazepines, and the 
proper use of physostigmine antidotal therapy. 24 Early 
return to duty is not realistic for the majority of affected 
patients due to the usual time course of intoxication, 
which could last several days.
Riot-Control Agents
Riot-control agents are the chemical agents an 
MMO is most likely to encounter. Also called lacrimators or tear gas, riot-control agents produce 
temporary discomfort and eye closure, which renders individuals unable to fight. 26 Current military 
use includes law enforcement for riot control and 
gas chamber training exercises to evaluate proper 
use of the protective mask. The primary riot-control 
agents used in the United States are CN (mace), CS 
(tear gas), and OC (pepper spray). These agents are 
crystallized solids dispersed as fine particles via 
spray, grenade, or foam. 27 
The mechanism of toxicity of riot-control agents is 
not well characterized, and the main effects consist 
of temporary pain and burning of exposed mucous 
membranes and skin. The eye is the organ most sensitive to these agents. 27 Conjunctival burning leads 
to tearing and blepharospasm producing temporary 
blindness. Inhalation in the airways causes burning, 
sneezing, and coughing. The MMO might anticipate 
more serious pulmonary reactions in individuals with 
chronic pulmonary diseases. 
Usually decontamination will not be needed if 
exposure was outdoors; however, the skin can be decontaminated with soap and water, and eyes should 
be decontaminated by flushing with copious amounts 
of water. 26 Medical providers do not require protection 
once an exposed patient has been decontaminated. 
Effects of exposure are usually self-limited and require no specific therapy but can be lethal under high 
concentration in a confined space. Also, because the 
effects are self-limiting, most individuals should be 
able to return to duty. 26 
Overview of Decontamination 
Decontamination, the removal of hazardous 
chemical, biological, or radiological agents from a 
person or object, is a critical nonmedical task that 
is personnel, time, and equipment intensive. Performance while wearing protective equipment is 
degraded. 28 For suspected contaminated patients, 
decontamination should occur as quickly as possible after exposure. The goals are to immediately 
remove the agents from those exposed by non-toxic 
means, and to maintain an uncontaminated military 
medical treatment facility (MTF). Decontamination 
is not critical for people exposed only to vapor,29 
but for patients exposed to liquids, aerosols, or 
538
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
dry solids, thorough decontamination is required, 
especially when patients will enter a medical facility where staff are not in protective clothing. Three 
methods of skin decontamination are preferred by 
the US military:
 
1. RSDL is a packaged sponge containing liquid 
potassium solution that deactivates mustard 
(HD) and nerve agent. It may be used only 
on intact skin, not on wounds or eyes (only 
water, normal saline, or eye solutions are 
recommended for decontaminating the eyes). 
RSDL is carried by military members for immediate field self-decontamination, but its 
use does not eliminate the need for thorough 
decontamination later. 29
 
2. Soap and water in copious amounts is effective for washing away most agents. It does 
not destroy biological agents or neutralize 
radioactive particles. The predominant effects are physical removal and dilution of 
agents. 29
 
3. Hypochlorite solution, 0. 5% (nine parts 
water to one part normal 5% bleach), can be 
wiped on the skin and rinsed with fresh water. The solution will cause a slow chemical 
decontamination reaction. 29
The decontamination process requires controlled removal of the personal protective equipment (PPE) and 
skin decontamination before treatment in the MTF. 
Contaminated bandages are removed and wounds 
are flushed with sterile water. Bandages are replaced 
if bleeding recurs. Splints are thoroughly rinsed with 
0. 5% hypochlorite solution. 29 Wounds contaminated 
with vesicants or nerve agents may present a hazard 
to providers. 29 The risk from off-gassing from a contaminated wound is not significant, and removal of the 
foreign material effectively eliminates the hazard, so a 
chemical protective mask is not required for surgical 
personnel. 29 Patients are certified clean from chemical 
agents after decontamination using M8 paper, the Joint 
Chemical Agent Detector (JCAD), or the Improved 
Chemical Agent Monitor (ICAM). 29 
Patient Decontamination Site 
Ideally, decontamination of casualties should be 
done in the field before evacuation to a medical facility 
(unfortunately, most victims bypass prehospital care 
and arrive unannounced at the closest MTF). Decontaminated casualties arriving from a contaminated 
environment must enter an MTF through a patient 
decontamination site (PDS). 30 This ensures MTF patients and staff will not become cross-contaminated 
by arriving contaminated casualties. The principal 
components of the PDS include: 
 
• an entry control point,
 
• a triage area,
 
• an emergency medical treatment (EMT) area,
 
• a decontamination area, and
 
• a “hot line” separating the contaminated from 
clean areas. 30,31
Medical personnel should be available to perform 
triage and emergency care in the contaminated 
“warm” zone before casualties are decontaminated. 
Casualties needing emergency care are sent to the 
warm side EMT. Because patient decontamination 
involves heavy work that can cause overheating, the 
decontamination team should be supplemented with 
nonmedical personnel. A safety officer must be appointed to observe PDS workers and manage work/
rest cycles. Medical facilities must consider environmental variables such as wind direction and water 
run-off when establishing a decontamination site. 30,31
BIOLOGICAL WARFARE AGENTS
In late March 1979, at a Soviet army biological research facility on the outskirts of Sverdlovsk, USSR, 
in the foothills of the Ural Mountains, a technician 
removed a clogged filter in the anthrax drying plant, 
briefly allowing spores to escape. Approximately 1 
g of a powerful weaponized strain, anthrax 836, was 
released into the cold night air. In a few days all the 
night shift workers in a plant across the street, in the 
direct path of the wind, had fallen ill, and within a 
week almost all were dead. Over the next 6 weeks 
at least 66 persons died from inhalational anthrax, 
and farm animals died up to 50 km within a narrow 
zone downwind from the factory. 32 The outbreak, a 
“biological Chernobyl,” demonstrated the power of 
anthrax as a biological weapon and clearly showed 
that the USSR was producing offensive biological 
weapons, in violation of the 1972 Biological Weapons 
Convention. 33
Prior to 1969, the United States had an active biological warfare program that included research, development, and stockpiling of offensive biological weapons. 
Under President Nixon, the United States unilaterally 
renounced the development and production of biological weapons. From that time forward, US efforts 
539
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
in biological warfare have been restricted to research 
and development of vaccines, drugs, and diagnostics 
as defensive measures against biological weapons. 34 
While the United States offensive biological warfare 
program included open-air testing using simulants 
thought to be nonpathogenic, the US military has 
never used biological weapons. 34,35 In contrast to the 
United States, the USSR (and Russia) had a massive 
offensive biological weapons program until 1992, and 
Iraq maintained some offensive biological weapons 
capacity until 2003. 33,34,36 
There have been two large-scale bioterrorist 
attacks in the United States: the 1984 Rajneeshee 
salmonella attack, which resulted in 751 cases of 
infection, and the 2001 anthrax mailings, which 
resulted in 22 cases of infection, 5 deaths, and approximately 10,000 suspected exposures to patients 
who were offered postexposure prophylaxis. 37,38 
Published reports suggest that the threat of biological terrorism continues to increase, and the use of 
biological weapons in both large- and small-scale 
attacks against US military and civilians continues 
to be actively explored by nations and terrorist 
groups. 34,39 In 2001 a team of virologists in Germany 
and France constructed an Ebola virus from three 
strands of complimentary DNA using reverse genetics, with technology described by the National 
Scientific Advisory Board for Biosecurity as “readily 
accessible, straightforward, and a fundamental tool 
used in current biological research.”40,41 However, 
MMOs should understand that while many biological agents can cause illness in humans, few are 
capable of affecting public health and medical infrastructures on a large scale, like anthrax and Ebola. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) has been designated the lead agency for overall 
national public health planning and response to biological terrorism. It has prioritized high-risk biological 
agents based on their overall threat to civilians (Table 
35-3). 42 This chapter focuses on Category A agents and 
their relevance to the MMO. MMOs must maintain a 
high index of suspicion and be prepared to evaluate 
both symptomatic patients and asymptomatic “suspected exposed” military and civilian patients referred 
from syndromic surveillance systems.
Bacterial Agents
Anthrax
Inhalational anthrax in the United States under 
normal circumstances is so unusual that a single case 
should prompt an investigation for bioterrorism. 
Naturally occurring anthrax is primarily a disease of 
herbivores. The causative agent of anthrax is a grampositive sporulating rod, Bacillus anthracis, and spores 
are the usual infective form. 43 
In New York City on September 29, 2001, a 7-monthold infant was noted to have a painless red papule 
with swelling on his upper arm. During the next 24 
hours his arm became increasingly edematous, the 
papule evolved into a painless macule, and a slight 
serous drainage began. His pediatrician began antibiotics for presumed cellulitis, but the infant soon 
required admission for increased swelling and difficulty tolerating oral medication. By hospital day 
2 the arm showed massive non-pitting edema with 
a dark red macule 3 cm in diameter. The working 
diagnosis was “spider-bite.” The infant continued 
to deteriorate. On hospital day 13 he was diagnosed 
with cutaneous anthrax by skin biopsy and blood 
testing for B anthracis. Eventually the infant made a 
full recovery on appropriate antibiotics. It was later 
determined that the day before his symptoms began, 
the infant had spent an hour in his mother’s office at 
a national news organization, where anthrax spores 
were subsequently found. 44
Cutaneous anthrax had never before been diagnosed in an infant in New York. The first case of inhalational anthrax associated with the anthrax mailings 
was not recognized until October 4. Earlier diagnosis 
of cutaneous anthrax in this case would have alerted 
the medical community to the impending danger and 
prevented further delay in diagnosis of other symptomatic patients.
Anthrax presents as three distinct clinical diseases 
in humans determined by the route of entry of the 
spores: inhalational, cutaneous, and gastrointestinal 
(GI). The most severe of these is inhalational anthrax, 
which presents as a nonspecific febrile illness after a 1- 
to 6-day incubation period. 43 The inhalational anthrax 
syndrome may include nausea, vomiting, nonproductive cough, fever, malaise, headache, and chest discomfort. 45,46 Physical findings are nonspecific early in the 
course of disease. Evidence of mediastinal widening 
(hemorrhagic mediastinitis) or pleural effusions may 
be seen on chest x-ray or computed tomography (CT) 
scan. 47 Prominent hilar adenopathy is characteristic. 43 
The patient will progress to respiratory distress, septic 
shock, and death unless provided aggressive intensive 
care. 43 Due to the fulminant course of inhalational 
anthrax, prompt antibiotics are essential for survival, 
and monotherapy is not acceptable. 48 More advanced 
therapies are available under Investigational New 
Drug (IND) authorization subject to Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) regulations. 48 
Direct person-to-person spread does not occur, and 
standard universal patient precautions are recom540
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 35-3
CRITICAL BIOLOGICAL AGENT CATEGORIES FOR PUBLIC HEALTH PREPAREDNESS
Biological Agents*
Disease
Category A: moderate to high potential for large-scale dissemination; greatest potential for production of mass casualties 
and major impact on public health
Variola major
Smallpox
Bacillus anthracis
Anthrax
Yersinia pestis
Plague
Clostridium botulinum (botulinum toxins)
Botulism
Francisella tularensis
Tularemia
Filoviruses and arenaviruses (eg, Ebola virus, Lassa virus)
Viral hemorrhagic fevers
Category B: some potential for large-scale dissemination; cause less illness and death and expected to have lower public 
health impact
Coxiella burnetii
Q fever
Brucella species
Brucellosis
Burkholderia mallei
Glanders
Burkholderia pseudomallei
Melioidosis
Alphaviruses (VEE, EEE, WEE)
Encephalitis
Rickettsia prowazekii
Typhus fever
Toxins (eg, ricin, staphylococcal enterotoxin B)
Toxic syndromes
Chlamydia psittaci
Psittacosis
Food safety threats (eg, Salmonella species, Escherichia coli 
O157:H7)
Water safety threats (eg, Vibrio cholerae, Cryptosporidium parvum)
Category C: could emerge as a future threat; not believed to be a significant public health threat at present
Emerging threat agents (eg, Nipah virus, Hantavirus, multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, SARS, MERS)
*The categories of agents should not be considered definitive and may change as new information is obtained.
EEE: Eastern equine encephalomyelitis; MERS: Middle East respiratory syndrome; SARS: severe acute respiratory syndrome; VEE: Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis; WEE: Western equine encephalomyelitis 
Reproduced with permission from: Rotz LD, Khan AS, Lillibridge SR, et al. Public health assessment of potential biological terrorism agents. 
Emerg Infect Dis. 2002;8(2):225-226. 
mended. Anthrax is detectable in early stages via blood 
culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and later 
stages via Gram stain of blood, cerebral spinal fluid 
(CSF), or pleural fluid. 43 B anthracis culture requires 
biosafety level (BSL) 2 lab precautions. 
Biothrax (Anthrax Vaccine Adsorbed [AVA]; Emergent BioSolutions, Gaithersburg, MD) is a safe vaccine 
licensed for the prevention of anthrax. 43 It is included 
in the Strategic National Stockpile and indicated for 
postexposure prophylaxis (PEP). 48 Antibiotics and 
AVA are indicated for PEP; all patients exposed to 
anthrax should receive prophylactic antibiotic treatment for 60 days. 48 Anthrax is thought to be the most 
likely biological agent to be used in future bioterrorism attacks. 45 Anthrax spores were weaponized by 
the United States, the USSR, and Iraq, among other 
countries. 49,50 During the Persian Gulf War, US military 
members carried ciprofloxacin to be used prophylactically in the event of an anthrax attack on US forces. 43
Plague
Yersinia pestis is a gram-negative bacterium that 
causes plague, a naturally occurring disease spread 
from rodents through direct contact or contact with 
infected fleas. Plague is endemic to the US southwest, 
but naturally occurring pneumonic plague is rare. 
Three pandemics of plague occurred in the 6th, 14th, 
541
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
and 19th centuries, killing millions of people. 51 The 
highly contagious nature of plague via person-toperson transmission makes it an attractive high-threat 
biological terrorist weapon, and it was weaponized by 
the United States and USSR. 52
Plague appears in three forms in humans: pneumonic, septicemic, and bubonic. Pneumonic plague 
would be the disease form expected after aerosol 
dissemination and presents as a severe respiratory 
illness of sudden onset 1 to 6 days after exposure. 52 
Classic symptoms include high fever, headache, 
and cough with hemoptysis. 52 Death results from 
respiratory failure, circulatory collapse, and bleeding 
diathesis. 51 Plague should be suspected by the MMO 
if a large number of previously healthy individuals 
present with severe pneumonia with hemoptysis. 
The MMO can establish a presumptive diagnosis by 
identifying gram-negative coccobacilli in sputum. A 
definitive diagnosis requires culturing the organism, 
which usually takes 48 to 72 hours. PCR and direct 
fluorescent antibody tests may be available in certain 
reference labs. 53
Early treatment with antibiotics is required for 
survival, ideally within 1 day of symptoms, although 
naturally occurring antibiotic-resistant strains exist. 53 
Patient management requires respiratory droplet precautions because pneumonic plague is easily spread 
person-to-person via aerosol, yet this has not occurred 
in the United States since 1925. 51 All individuals who 
come within 2 m of a patient with pneumonic plague 
should receive PEP with antibiotics. 53 No vaccine has 
been available since 1998, and the previously available vaccine was not effective against pneumonic 
plague. 51,53
Tularemia
Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, is a small, naturally occurring, hardy, and 
extremely virulent gram-negative coccobacillus. F 
tularensis can be stabilized and aerosolized to make an 
effective offensive weapon, and it has been associated 
with multiple environmental biosurveillance alerts in 
the United States since 2001. 54 As a result, the MMO 
could see “suspected exposed” patients referred via 
bioterrorism aerosol surveillance programs. 54 
Tularemia is acquired primarily through contact 
with rabbits, ticks, or fleabites. It was weaponized by 
the United States and the USSR and has a very low 
infectious dose; exposure to approximately 10 organisms will cause disease. 55 A high index of suspicion 
is needed to make an early diagnosis of tularemia. 
After aerosol inhalation and an incubation period of 
3 to 6 days, the disease manifests as abrupt onset of 
fever, headache, malaise, myalgia, and prostration, followed by pleura-pneumonia. 56 F tularensis is difficult 
to culture with standard lab media, and isolation of 
the organism requires a BSL-3 level containment lab. 57
The initial treatment is with intravenous antibiotics. 
There has been no known human-to-human transmission of tularemia, so only standard precautions are 
required. 55 Since there is no licensed vaccine available, 
PEP is managed with antibiotics and should be continued for 14 days. 57
Viral Agents
Viruses, as intracellular parasites requiring host 
cells for replication, cannot be cultivated in synthetic 
nutrient materials. The MMO should recognize that 
some viruses are well suited as bioweapons.
Smallpox (Variola)
Smallpox, caused by the variola virus, was declared 
eradicated by the World Health Organization in 1980. 
The United States ended routine civilian vaccination 
in 1972 and routine smallpox military vaccination in 
1989. 58 Two repositories for the smallpox virus exist 
in the United States and Russia; however, the extent 
of clandestine stockpiles as a biological weapon is 
unknown, and the possibility of its reemergence exists. Smallpox was easily cultured, very stable, and 
successfully weaponized. 59 Large stockpiles of this 
agent existed in the USSR, where it was viewed as a 
strategic weapon of opportunity. Since routine civilian 
immunization ended, there is now a large immunologically naïve population. 33,58
The initial diagnosis of smallpox is clinical. The 
MMO must differentiate smallpox from other papulovesicular lesion-producing diseases. The clinical 
manifestations of smallpox appear in a series of distinct 
phases that are uniquely characteristic, and its rash 
may be confused with chickenpox. Lesions appear 
first on the face and hands, then spread to the extremities, and finally the trunk. Classically, lesions remain 
synchronous in their stage of development throughout the body during each clinical phase. Microscopy 
cannot distinguish between the orthopox viruses, but 
PCR may distinguish variola. 58 The MMO may fail 
to recognize patients with immunocompromise who 
develop different, non-classic forms of disease, and 
human monkeypox may look indistinguishable from 
smallpox. 58 
To the MMO, any case of smallpox should be considered a public health emergency. There is no FDAapproved chemotherapy, but antiviral drugs for use 
against smallpox are under investigation. 60 Individuals 
542
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
with successful smallpox vaccination within 3 years 
that resulted in a confirmed clinical take (progression 
from papule to vesicle to pustule to scab at the inoculation site) are considered immune to smallpox; however, routine revaccination of all potentially exposed 
individuals would be prudent in the face of significant 
exposure risk. 60
Immediate vaccination or revaccination with 
smallpox (live vaccinia virus) vaccine (ACAM 2000), 
ideally within 4 days for all exposed personnel, will 
likely ameliorate or prevent disease. 60 There are no 
absolute contraindications to postexposure vaccination for high-risk exposures, and vaccinia immune 
globulin (VIG) is indicated for rare life-threatening 
complications from vaccinia vaccine, such as eczema 
vaccinatum and postvaccinial encephalitis. 58,59
The MMO must recognize that smallpox is highly 
infectious; transmission occurs person-to-person by 
respiratory droplets and is enhanced by coughing. 58–61 
Infection can also occur from contact with infected 
clothing or bedding. Patients are infectious from onset of rash until all scabs separate. Infectious patients 
require isolation with contact, airborne, and droplet 
precautions. 60 All asymptomatic contacts must be 
quarantined for 17 days. 60
PCR testing for smallpox is available under BSL-4 
conditions at national laboratories (US Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious Diseases and the 
CDC) via the Laboratory Response Network. A PCR 
test that detects all orthopoxviruses may be available 
via the military area medical laboratory. 60
Viral Hemorrhagic Fever
On September 25, 2014, a 45-year-old man from 
Liberia, who had arrived in the US 5 days earlier, 
went to a Dallas, Texas, emergency department with 
fever (100. 1° F), abdominal pain, and headache. He 
was treated for possible sinusitis and discharged. 
He returned to the same emergency department via 
ambulance on September 28 with fever (101. 4° F), abdominal pain, and severe diarrhea. He tested positive 
for Ebola virus on September 30, the first imported 
Ebola virus infection diagnosed in the United States. 
Despite intensive care, the patient died 8 days later. 
Although PPE and appropriate precautions were 
used, two nurses caring for the patient subsequently 
contracted Ebola virus disease (EVD) and required 
prolonged intensive care; both survived. Multiple 
community contacts of all patients were either voluntarily quarantined or actively monitored for 21 days, 
and 12 persons in this group developed fever or other 
symptoms compatible with EVD, but no other person 
contracted EVD. 62
Viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) is an acute febrile 
syndrome from a diverse group of tick-, rodent-, and 
mosquito-borne viral illnesses naturally occurring in 
specific geographic locations. These diseases are unified by their potential to present as a severe febrile 
illness with a bleeding diathesis and high mortality 
rate. The MMO should recognize two VHF viruses, 
yellow fever and dengue, that have great significance 
in the history of military medicine. 63 While the VHFs 
have not been weaponized, they are recognized as 
having significant potential for aerosol dissemination and weaponization, and the Aum Shinrikyo 
group attempted to obtain Ebola virus samples from 
West Africa for development in their bioterrorism 
program. 33,63–65 Aerosol dissemination does not occur 
naturally. 63,64 
The clinical presentation of VHF includes various 
combinations of fever, malaise, myalgia, headache, 
vomiting, and diarrhea. The initial constellation of 
symptoms makes VHF difficult to distinguish from 
other acute febrile illnesses. VHF should be considered 
by the MMO in any patient presenting with severe 
acute febrile illness and abnormal bleeding. 66 Differentiating the VHFs is difficult, and making a definitive 
diagnosis of VHF requires a reference laboratory with 
BSL-4 advanced bio-containment capability. Rapid 
enzyme immunoassays and PCR testing exist but 
may not be readily available for specific VHFs. Lab 
specimens must be appropriately collected, handled, 
double-bagged, decontaminated, and shipped to the 
BSL-4 lab. 66
Treatment includes intensive supportive care with 
vigorous fluid resuscitation under strict contact precautions and negative-pressure isolation. Management 
of the hemorrhagic component mirrors other patient 
coagulopathies. Intramuscular injections and aspirin 
and other anticoagulants should be avoided. Airborne 
precautions must be instituted for procedures that create aerosols. Antiviral therapy may be available on an 
investigational new drug basis. 64 VHF patients harbor 
extensive infectious viral load in blood, body fluids, 
and body secretions,63,64,66 and MMOs must be aware 
that caring for these patients has proven to be highly 
risky and labor and staff intensive. Staff treating VHF 
patients should wear double gloves, impermeable 
gowns with leg and shoe coverings, eye protection and 
HEPA (N95) masks or positive pressure air-purifying 
respirators. 66 Medical staff will experience significant 
risk from contaminated PPE, in particular during the 
doffing process, and all waste should be carefully 
handled and incinerated or autoclaved.
After a presumed bio-warfare attack with unknown 
VHF agent, the MMO should consider intravenous 
antiviral drugs for any exposed individual with fever 
543
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
higher than 101° F, until the agent is identified. 66 Yellow 
fever is the only VHF for which a licensed vaccine is 
available. Experimental vaccines exist for other VHFs, 
but are not readily available. 66 Close personal contacts 
of VHF patients, including medical personnel, should 
be closely monitored for fever and other symptoms 
during the established incubation period. 
Biological Toxins
Toxins are harmful substances produced by living 
organisms. By nature they lack volatility (there is no 
vapor hazard), do not persist in the environment, are 
not dermally active, and pose no risk for person-toperson spread. 67 Biological toxins have military utility 
as aerosolized weapons based on the magnitude of 
their toxicity. 67
Botulinum
By weight, botulinum toxins are the most toxic 
substance known. It has been estimated that 1 g of 
aerosolized botulinum toxin could kill more than a 
million people. 68 Botulinum toxins are a group of seven 
related neurotoxins produced by the spore-forming 
bacillus Clostridium botulinum, which is present in the 
soil. 67 Botulinum toxin inhibits neurotransmission by 
preventing acetylcholine release at the nerve terminal. 67 Neurotoxins produced by C botulinum are readily 
denatured in the environment. 67 There are three forms 
of naturally occurring botulism: foodborne botulism, 
wound botulism, and intestinal botulism (infant and 
adult).
The intentional use of botulinum toxin can be either 
an inhalational or foodborne threat, and industrialscale fermentation could produce large amounts of 
toxin. 67 A large aerosol release would easily overwhelm healthcare capabilities. Botulinum toxin has 
been weaponized by the United States, USSR, Iraq, 
and terrorist organizations. 67–70 Aum Shinrikyo attempted to dispense botulinum toxin in Tokyo in the 
mid-1990s. 65 In an outbreak related to an intentional 
aerosolized release, the MMO should expect patients 
presenting as afebrile, alert, and oriented, with descending paralysis manifested by cranial nerve palsies, 
including ptosis, diplopia, blurred vision, dysphagia, 
and dysphonia, followed by symmetrical descending 
flaccid paralysis. 67,68 Respiratory failure, which may 
occur abruptly, is the most common cause of death. 
Symptoms may progress over hours or days depending on the exposure dose. Sensory symptoms do not 
occur and botulinum toxin does not cross the bloodbrain barrier, so altered sensorium should not occur. 71 
Botulism is a clinical diagnosis because laboratory 
testing can be inconclusive. Mouse neutralization (bioassay) is the most sensitive test and can take up to 4 
days; an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
test also exists. 71 Early administration of antitoxin is 
critical; antitoxin must never be withheld from the 
patient, even if treatment is delayed. 71 Postexposure 
prophylaxis with antitoxin administration, while not 
recommended, should be considered under extraordinary circumstances after a high-risk exposure. 67,71
Ricin
Ricin is a potent cytotoxin derived from the mash 
of the castor bean. Its mechanism of toxicity is via 
inhibition of protein synthesis. 72 Ricin has military 
significance because of the ease with which it can be 
extracted from the castor bean. It is ideal for small-scale 
bioterrorism attacks and has been successfully used in 
several notorious political assassinations. 72,73
Ricin’s clinical presentation depends on the dose 
and route of exposure. It is primarily a threat via 
aerosol inhalation and ingestion. 72 The MMO should 
suspect ricin in a large number of geographically 
clustered cases of acute lung injury, because inhalation 
causes severe, progressive lung inflammation leading 
to respiratory failure over days. 74 Ingestion will cause 
severe GI inflammation and multiorgan failure. 74 The 
diagnosis of ricin poisoning will be challenging for the 
MMO because multiple pulmonary pathogens could 
present similarly to aerosolized ricin. Specific tests 
exist but are not readily available. 73,74
There is no antitoxin to ricin. Treatment for ricin 
poisoning is supportive, regardless of the route of 
exposure. Patients should be thoroughly decontaminated with soap and water. 72–74 Ricin-induced lung 
injury will not respond to antibiotics, and ricin ingestion is managed by lavage and cathartics. 73,74 Ricin 
toxicity is not contagious, and protective masks are 
effective. While vaccines are under investigation, none 
currently exist. 74
RADIOLOGICAL AND NUCLEAR EXPOSURES
In 2011, an earthquake with a subsequent tsunami 
stuck Japan, resulting in flooding of the nuclear reactor plant in Fukushima. The subsequent loss of power 
caused the reactor to overheat, followed by meltdowns 
and evacuations from the surrounding area. The 
event was categorized as level 7 on the International 
Nuclear and Radiologic Event Scale, and is estimated 
to involve 10% of the exposure that occurred at 
544
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Chernobyl, Russia, in 1986. 75 The Chernobyl accident 
is the largest nuclear disaster in history, causing 30 
immediate deaths and the evacuation of over 300,000 
people. Reports of health issues related to radiation 
exposure continue. 76
Three types of devices pose a risk of radiation exposure to military personnel: (1) a radiation exposure device (RED); (2) a radiological dispersion device (RDD); 
and (3) an improvised nuclear device (IND). An RED 
has a radioactive source within a container or sealed 
source for the purpose of exposing those nearby to 
high doses of radiation. Various military and civilian/
industrial supplies and equipment contain radioactive material that could be used to create an RED or 
RDD to employ as a weapon or cause exposure due to 
improper storage or handling. RDDs are intentionally 
engineered to disperse radiation but without a nuclear 
blast. Dispersal may be through a plume or contamination of the food and water chain. 
INDs, designed to deliver a nuclear detonation at 
either full or partial yield, are the most catastrophic 
of these devices. INDs expose individuals to a 
high level of external radiation, blast and thermal 
injury, and subsequent radiation exposure through 
inhalation of particulate matter and ingestion of 
contaminated materials. The primary effect of an 
IND is the blast effect. The medical management 
of blast injury from both nuclear and non-nuclear 
explosive devices is discussed in detail later in this 
chapter. Unique to INDs is an intense thermal wave 
of energy known as the nuclear flash. Individuals in the immediate vicinity will be incinerated. 
Surviving individuals will suffer burns on the side 
exposed to the blast or from secondary fires ignited 
by the thermal wave. The other principal output 
from a nuclear blast is radiation, in both primary 
and secondary exposures. 
Radiation Effects
Radiation effects can be divided into two categories, 
acute external exposure and internal contamination. 
Both an RDD and an IND can cause an immediate 
release of radiological material leading to acute radiation syndrome (ARS). Acute external exposure 
usually involves beta and gamma particles. Internal 
contamination can occur via inhalation, ingestion, 
or absorption from a contaminated wound. Internal 
contamination can be due to any isotopes, of which 
there are over 8,000. Radioactive decay from isotopes 
creates ionizing radiation whose properties can vary 
(Table 35-4). Internal contamination is unique from 
external exposure and ARS because isotope identification is crucial in medical management.
External Exposure 
ARS is the result of high-level (> 0. 7 Gy) exposure 
to ionizing radiation. Exhibit 35-1 lists conditions that 
can result in ARS. A characteristic constellation of 
clinical events results from radiation damage to cells 
that occurs within seconds of exposure. The organ 
systems and cell lines with the highest turnover are 
the most sensitive to radiation exposure. ARS follows 
a predictable course through four phases: prodromal, 
latent, well-defined illness, and finally recovery or 
death. The transition time between phases depends on 
the dose of radiation received. The prodromal phase, 
which can last minutes to days, is characterized by 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mild fever, and transient 
skin erythema. The patient then may appear well for 
a few hours, or even a few weeks, during the latent 
phase, which is characterized by silent cell and tissue 
destruction. This destruction is later manifested clinically as one or more of the syndromes described below. 
TABLE 35-4
PROPERTIES AND EFFECTS OF IONIZING RADIATION
Type
Source
Properties
Clinical Concern
Alpha particles
Charged particles from heavy 
nuclei
Travel short distance, shielded 
by clothes/skin
Wound absorption
Beta particles
Electrons from fallout or 
certain isotopes
Travel short distance in tissue
Can cause radiation burns, damaging if internalized
Gamma rays
Photons from nuclear detonation, fallout, or nuclear decay
High energy and pass through 
matter easily
Whole body effects from both external exposure and internalization
Neutrons
Uncharged particles emitted 
from fission
High energy and pass through 
matter easily
Same effects as gamma rays with 
more significant damage 
545
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
EXHIBIT 35-1
CONDITIONS REQUIRED FOR ACUTE 
RADIATION SYNDROME
 
• Dose must be large (>0. 7 Gy).
 
• Dose must be external.
 
• The radiation must be penetrating (x-rays, 
gamma rays, neutrons).
 
• The entire body must be exposed.
 
• The dose must be delivered in a short time.
Adapted from: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Acute radiation syndrome: a fact sheet for physicians. https://
emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/arsphysicianfactsheet.asp. 
Updated August 23, 2017. Accessed July 4, 2018.
Death can occur within days for extremely high doses 
but may not occur for weeks to months. Recovery can 
take up to 2 years.
There are three classic ARS syndromes: (1) hematopoietic, (2) GI, and (3) neurovascular. The hematopoietic syndrome, also known as the bone marrow syndrome, occurs with doses above 0. 7 Gy. Hematopoietic 
progenitors are unable to divide, resulting in bone 
marrow failure and lymphopenia or pancytopenia. 
Destruction of cell lines leads to infection, bleeding, 
and poor wound healing. Survival depends on dose, 
concomitant injuries, and access to supportive care. 
The mean lethal dose required to kill 50% of humans 
within 60 days, LD50/60, is about 3. 5 to 4 Gy. Providing 
medical therapy including antibiotics, transfusions, 
and cell line stimulation can improve survival at higher 
exposure doses. 
The GI syndrome occurs in conjunction with the 
hematopoietic syndrome at doses higher than 6 Gy. 
This level of radiation causes damage to the small 
intestine, targeted at intestinal crypt cells that have 
a high turnover rate. This syndrome has the typical 
flu-like prodromal phase, and diarrhea is often characteristic. The overt clinical phase involves malaise, 
anorexia, severe diarrhea, and fever. The diarrhea 
can lead to dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. 
Loss of GI integrity can lead to malabsorption and 
nutritional disorders. Bacteria can translocate across 
the damaged epithelial lining of the intestinal wall and 
lead to gram-negative sepsis. More severely affected 
patients can present in renal failure or cardiovascular 
collapse. While aggressive supportive care can extend 
the survival period, death usually occurs from sepsis 
and multiorgan failure.
The most severe and rapidly fatal of the syndromes, 
due to doses higher than 12 Gy, is the neurovascular 
syndrome. High radiation exposure will result in an 
immediate burning sensation, followed by nausea 
and vomiting, fever, hypotension, and neurologic 
dysfunction such as ataxia and confusion. Symptoms 
are rapidly progressive and severe; death typically 
occurs in 24 to 48 hours. Recovery is not expected in 
patients with this syndrome.
Knowing that the clinical syndromes are dose dependent, markers to estimate radiation dose early in 
the evaluation of exposed patients can be very useful. 
Radiation dose can be estimated using the medical 
history, serial blood counts, and the time to emesis. 
Medical history should include the circumstances of 
suspected exposure, taking note of location relative 
to the incident, sheltering, and any other pertinent 
exposure details, in addition to clinical symptoms. 
Serial blood counts are one of the most readily available and useful methods to characterize exposure. 
An initial complete blood count followed by serial 
measurements three times a day for 2 to 3 days will 
facilitate determination of the slope of lymphocyte 
decline. A drop in lymphocyte count by more than 
50% in the first 24 hours indicates a potentially lethal 
exposure. Time to emesis can be used in the absence 
of laboratory support or as an adjunct to lymphocyte 
count. Emesis within 1 to 2 hours of exposure carries 
a poor prognosis. 
The chromosome-aberration cytogenetic bioassay 
(specifically lymphocyte dicentrics) is considered the 
gold standard in estimating dose. However, samples 
must be obtained within 24 hours of exposure, and 
results may not be available for 2 to 3 days, so time to 
emesis and lymphocyte counts remain the most useful tools in the initial assessment period. It is helpful 
to remember that if an individual has not vomited 
within 8 to 10 hours of exposure, it is unlikely he or 
she was exposed to a dose over 1 Gy. 77,78 The Armed 
Forces Radiobiology Research Institute Biodosimetry 
Assessment Tool is a software package that can help 
providers assess exposure and guide therapy. The 
tool has a complimentary package for first responders 
called the First Responders Radiologic Assessment Triage. These useful tools can facilitate optimization of a 
standardized framework for the response to nuclear 
or radiological catastrophe. 79
Triage and Treatment of Radiation-Injured 
Patients 
Radiation-injured patients are emergently treated 
for life, limb, or eyesight injuries regardless of 
contamination. A radiological detonation produces 
casualties with a combination of blast injury, thermal 
injury, and various wounds—all requiring medical 
546
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 35-5 
DETECTION LIMITS* FOR DECONTAMINATION 
Type of Radiation
Limit
Alpha particles
< 1,000 disintegrations/minute
Beta particle
< 1 mR/h
Gamma rays
< 2 × local background level
*Upper limit of radiation that must be reached to consider an individual thoroughly decontaminated. If an individual is above these 
levels, decontamination efforts should be continued until detectable 
radiation is below these limits.
attention. Triage of patients with combined injury 
should follow trauma protocols. If the only injuries 
are radiation injuries, then triage should consist of 
assessment of dose rate, prodromal symptoms, and 
specimen collection for biodosimetry. Contaminated 
patients pose little threat to healthcare personnel, 
and treatment of emergent conditions should not 
be delayed due to concerns of contamination. 
Decontamination is a time-consuming and resourceintensive process, so patients should be stabilized 
prior to decontamination. Fortunately, removing 
clothing, bandages, and personal effects removes 
90% of contamination, so exposure for trauma 
management begins the decontamination process. 
Further decontamination involves washing the 
skin with soap and water (preferred over 0. 5% 
hypochlorite solution) without irritating the skin. 
Standard hospital PPE (gown, cap, double gloves, 
and shoe covers) is adequate when decontaminating 
patients. If possible, irrigation effluent should be 
collected and disposed of deliberately.
Decontamination should be confirmed with 
radiation detection, indication, and computation 
(RADIAC) counters such as the AN/VDR-2 and the 
AN/PDR-77; refer to Table 35-5 for decontamination 
standards. To minimize local tissue injury and systemic contamination, particulate matter with alpha 
or beta emitters should be removed from wounds, 
and then the wound should be thoroughly irrigated. 
However, aggressive surgical debridement to eliminate particulate matter is not recommended and may 
cause more damage to tissue than would be posed 
by the radiation risk. Similarly, burns should be irrigated and cleaned while leaving blisters intact and 
minimizing damage to the skin. Once wounds and 
burns have been cleaned, they should be reexamined 
with a RADIAC counter.
After life-threatening injuries have been addressed 
and decontamination is complete, attention can be 
given to treatment of ARS. Therapy is determined 
by signs and symptoms, and laboratory parameters 
help guide treatment. Antibiotic agents and possibly 
antifungals and antivirals can be used in neutropenic 
patients to prevent infection. Fluoroquinolones with 
streptococcal coverage are most appropriate in the 
radiation-poisoned patient. When the patient is not 
neutropenic, antimicrobial therapy should be targeted to the specific infection. Supportive care such 
as anti-emetics, fluid therapy, electrolyte replacement, and analgesics can provide significant relief. 
Vomiting is common and, as described above, can 
be a prognostic indicator. While prophylaxis is not 
indicated, anti-emetics should be given once vomiting has begun. Serotonin receptor antagonists have 
well-documented efficacy for nausea and vomiting 
in radiation-treated patients, and thus should be 
useful in the setting of radiation poisoning. Fluid 
resuscitation should address losses due to trauma, 
burns, and GI symptoms. Patients with early onset 
multiorgan failure should be managed as expectant 
with the goal of providing comfort care coupled with 
psychological support.
For patients with low to moderate exposure and 
manifestation of the hematopoietic syndrome, attention should be given to support of cell lines. For 
exposures greater than 3 Gy, hematopoietic colony 
stimulating factors (CSFs) are recommended. For 
pediatric, geriatric, or polytrauma patients, the threshold for therapy should be lower. Therapy should be 
started as soon as biodosimetry or clinical signs and 
symptoms suggest this threshold exposure level. More 
severe exposures, over 7 Gy, may require transfusion 
therapy and even stem cell transplantation in addition to prolonged therapy with CSFs. Survival from 
acute effects in partial body exposures over 10 Gy is 
possible with hematopoietic support and early use of 
CSFs. Adjunctive therapies become necessary as ARS 
develops over days to weeks. 
In addition to medical therapy, it is important to 
recognize the psychological injuries that may occur 
as a result of nuclear or radiological injury. It is likely 
that the fear and anxiety associated with exposure 
outweighs the actual medical effects. Attention should 
be given to the immediate psychological response, 
combat stress effects, and long-term sequela of such 
a psychological stress such as posttraumatic stress 
disorder. A responsive, competent, compassionate, 
and confident medical response will do much to alleviate immediate anxiety and fear. Information flow 
should be accurate and timely. Anticipating the need 
for mental health support will help ensure resources 
are available to mitigate adverse psychological outcomes. 77,78
547
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
TABLE 35-6 
TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR SELECTED 
RADIOISOTOPES
Radionucleotides of:
Treatment
Plutonium 239
Zn-DTPA or Ca-DTPA
Yttrium 90
Zn-DTPA or Ca-DTPA
Uranium
Sodium bicarbonate
Cesium 137
Prussian blue
Strontium
Calcium or aluminum 
phosphate
Radioidodines
Potassium iodide
Zn-DTPA: zinc diethylenetriamene pentaacetate
Ca-DTPA: calcium diethylenetriamene pentaacetate
Internal Exposure
Ingestion, inhalation, or contamination of wounds 
with radioactive material are mechanisms of internal exposure. Isotope identification is crucial in the 
determination of medical management. An in-depth 
discussion of specific isotope management is beyond 
the scope of this chapter; however, some general 
principles apply to the care of these patients, based 
on reducing ongoing exposure. Available methods of 
reducing internal contamination include dilution, chelation, and chemically altering the isotope. Absorption 
in the GI tract can be reduced by lavage or cathartics; 
pulmonary load can be reduced by bronchoalveolar 
lavage; and contamination in wounds can be excised. 
Further treatment should be directed at decorporation 
of the isotope. Treatment for some of the more common isotopes is listed in Table 35-6. 78
Internal radiation exposure and ARS with associated physical and psychological injuries form a complex 
medical picture that requires optimization of decisionmaking and resource management to maximize 
medical outcomes. Survival can be greatly affected by 
wise therapy and supportive care, underscoring the 
importance of understanding the evaluation, triage, 
and medical management of radiological exposure. 77,78
EXPLOSIVE (BLAST) INJURIES
Blast injury can involve a complex array of injuries 
with various wounding mechanisms. Care of the blast 
victim can be especially challenging because the provider may be faced with several life-threatening injuries 
that must be addressed simultaneously. The magnitude 
of blast effects is influenced by several factors. For example, pressure generated in water moves more quickly 
and dissipates more slowly than pressure waves in 
air, so underwater blasts may lead to more injury. As 
distance from the blast increases, injury risk decreases, 
and shielding can provide significant protection. On the 
other hand, being in a confined space, or being close to 
a surface that reflects the propagating pressure wave, 
may result in magnification of the blast effects.
Mechanisms of Blast Injury 
Explosions cause injury by several mechanisms. 
The initial gas expansion causes a blast wave with 
high winds that can cause displacement of people or 
objects. This is followed by a pressure differential created by the blast wave, and then a negative pressure 
phase occurs before air pressures return to normal. 
Heat generation, fragmentation, and collapse of infrastructure can all contribute to injury. Blast injuries 
are thus characterized as primary, secondary, tertiary, 
and quaternary injury. Although this is a simplified 
taxonomy, it can be useful to theoretically organize 
the anticipated effects. 
Primary blast injury is a result of the blast overpressure and the forces it exerts upon the body. The 
pressure differential created by alternating overpressure and underpressure leads to both local tissue and 
systemic effects. Air-filled organ systems such as the 
GI, pulmonary, and auditory systems are the most 
sensitive, but blast effect can also cause musculoskeletal tissue damage, central nervous system injury, and 
even visual and cardiovascular effects. Injury is not 
isolated to local tissue effects. Cardiovascular collapse 
may occur as the result of pressure effects on the vagus 
nerve and dysfunctional vasoconstriction in response 
to diminished cardiac output. 
Flying debris displaced as a result of the blast 
wave and winds causes secondary injury in the form 
of both penetrating and blunt trauma. Secondary 
injury is seen more commonly than severe primary 
injury, and these injuries can be devastating. Tertiary 
injury occurs with structural collapse or when forces 
displace a person who then sustains blunt trauma 
such as fractures or a closed head injury. While 
tertiary injury may have a high mortality rate at the 
site of the explosion, it only represents a small portion of overall deaths. Lastly, the term quaternary 
injury captures all the other miscellaneous injuries 
that may occur as a result of explosions, such as 
burns, asphyxia, toxic (including chemical and radiological) exposures, and psychological sequela. 
Evaluation and management of secondary, tertiary, 
548
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
and quaternary injuries follows routine trauma management principles, so the following discussion will 
be limited to primary blast injury. 80,81
Evaluation and Management of Primary Blast 
Injury
Due to their large amount of air-filled tissue, the 
lungs are susceptible to primary blast injury. The pressure differential causes disruption of lung tissue with 
damage to the alveolar-capillary interface. Blast lung 
may be complicated by pneumothorax, hemothorax, 
pulmonary contusion, pulmonary hemorrhage, pulmonary emboli, mediastinal air, and subcutaneous 
air, all of which contribute to difficulty in oxygenation 
due to ventilation/perfusion mismatch. A chest x-ray 
done as part of routine trauma management will help 
identify pulmonary injuries. However, radiographic 
findings may be delayed, so observation for 4 to 6 
hours may be necessary in symptomatic patients. A 
CT may also be useful because some injuries may be 
missed on chest x-ray. Bilateral pulmonary infiltrates 
are commonly noted. Pneumothorax or hemothorax 
can be treated with tube thoracostomy. Severe injury 
resulting in impaired ventilation and oxygenation 
may require mechanical ventilation. Minimizing peak 
inspiratory pressures and allowing permissive hypercapnia may help minimize the risk of air emboli. To 
avoid volume overload, fluid use should be judicious. 
Similarly, cardiovascular collapse (described above) is 
best treated with inotrope support instead of aggressive fluid administration.
Much like the lungs, the GI tract is susceptible to 
injury due to air-filled viscus. Bowel injuries including contusion, ischemia with the risk for necrosis, or 
perforation are uncommon but possible results of blast 
waves. Body armor may help prevent secondary injury 
but cannot fully protect against pressure effects on the 
bowel. Bowel injury may be delayed in presentation; 
therefore, a high index of suspicion should drive evaluation. CT can be useful to evaluate for injuries, but it 
lacks sensitivity for contusions and mesenteric injury. 
Thus, serial exams are an important part of ensuring 
such injuries, or delayed development of hematoma or 
perforation, are not missed. Perforation, necrosis, and 
even severe ischemia are indications for laparotomy 
and likely resection.
The tympanic membrane (TM) is highly susceptible 
to blast injury, and the absence of TM injury makes it 
less likely there is significant injury to the lungs, GI 
tract, or CNS in otherwise asymptomatic patients. 
Sensorineuronal deafness and tinnitus can occur in 
addition to TM rupture. The blast wave may cause 
displacement of the ossicles or damage to sensory 
structures. Small, isolated TM ruptures will likely heal 
without surgical treatment, but larger perforations and 
other injuries should be referred for surgical evaluation. Patients with TM rupture should be evaluated 
closely for concussive brain injury.
While traumatic brain injury (TBI) is more commonly associated with secondary and tertiary mechanisms, 
it can be caused by primary blast injury. Cerebral 
concussive syndromes are common and may result 
from oxidative injury and neuronal cell death caused 
by the blast. Standardized assessment tools such as 
the Military Acute Concussion Evaluation (MACE) 
can help collect baseline and follow-up comparisons 
to risk-stratify patients and guide referral for further 
evaluation and therapy. Fortunately, most patients 
are categorized as mild TBI and recover quickly with 
conservative care.
Myriad other injuries have been described as a 
result of blast injury, including ocular injuries such 
as globe rupture, conjunctival hemorrhage, and hyphema, and cardiac injuries such as myocardial wall 
contusion, hemorrhage, and atrial rupture. Clearly, explosions can cause a complex array of blast effects that 
present clinical challenges. Understanding blast effects 
in an effort to make sound diagnostic and therapeutic 
decisions is important for the MMO. The evolution of 
modern warfare has underscored the importance of 
expertise in caring for victims of explosion.
CONCLUSION
The MMO must remain vigilant against a host 
of CBRNE threats while forward deployed as well 
as in garrison. Today’s unpredictable environment 
includes the risk of either traditional CBRNE attacks 
or for asymmetric engagements with novel methods 
such as the use of industrial chemicals as weapons. 
A substantial knowledge base and constant surveillance are required to quickly identify and respond 
to these possible events. Clinical practice guidelines 
(CPGs) relevant to the care of the CBRNE patient 
in the DoD environment can be found at http://
jts.amedd.army.mil/index.cfm/PI_CPGs/cpgs. The 
MMO should be familiar with the various CBRNE 
threats and means to mitigate such threats, possess 
the knowledge to recognize an exposure when it 
occurs, be able to conduct appropriate decontamination, and be familiar with management of CBRNE 
casualties.
549
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
REFERENCES
 
1. Okumura T, Kenji T, Kouchiro S, et al. The Tokyo subway sarin attack: acute and delayed health effects in survivors. 
In: Gupta R, ed. Handbook of Toxicology of Chemical Warfare Agents. London, UK: Elsevier; 2015: 27–31.
 
2. Smart JK, Mauroni AL, Hill BA, et al. History of the chemical threat, chemical terrorism, and its implications for 
military medicine. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 
130–146.
 
3. Browder G. Countering the Chemical Weapons Threat in the Post-Soviet World. Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office; February 23, 1993: 69.
 
4. The Report of the Mission Dispatched by the Secretary-General to Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical Weapons in the 
Conflict between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq. New York, NY: UN Security Council; March 12, 1986: 19.
 
5. Guterres A, Gamba V. Fifth Report of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. New York, NY: UN Security Council; February 13, 2017: 3–6.
 
6. Brennan RJ, Waeckerle JF, Sharp TW. Chemical warfare agents: emergency medical and emergency public health 
issues. Ann Emerg Med. 1999;34:191–204.
 
7. Kales SN, Christiani DC. Acute chemical emergencies. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:800–808.
 
8. Departments of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps. Multiservice Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear (NBC) Protection. Washington, DC: DoD; 2003. FM3-11. 4, MCWP 3-37. 2, NTTP 
3-11. 27, AFTTP (I) 3-2. 46.
 
9. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Individual protective equipment. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical 
Casualties Handbook. 5th ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 135–141. 
 10. Hurst CG, Petrali JP, Barillo DJ, et al. Vesicants. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, 
DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 260–295.
 11. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Vesicants. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 5th 
ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 29–54.
 12. Ruhl CM, Park DJ, Danisa O, et al. A serious skin sulfur mustard burn from artillery shell. J Emerg Med. 1994;12(2):159–
166.
 13. Newmark J, Langer J, Capacio B, et al. Liquid sulfur mustard exposure. Mil Med. 2007;172(2):196–198.
 14. Rimpel LY, Boehm DE, O’Hern MR, Dashiell TR, Tracy MF. Chemical defense equipment. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 560–589.
 15. Vedder EB. Vesicants. In: Vedder EB, ed. The Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare With a Chapter on the Naval Medical 
Aspects of Chemical Warfare by D.C. Walton. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; January 1925: 125–166. 
 16. Sidell FR, Newmark J, Mcdonough JH. Nerve agents. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 156–205.
 17. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Nerve agents. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 
5th ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 66–87.
 18. Capacio BR, Smoth JR, Gordon RK, Haigh JR, Barr JR, Platoff GE. Medical diagnostics. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical 
Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 692–741.
 19. Varma DR, Mulay S. Methyl isocyanate: The Bhopal Gas. In: Gupta R, ed. Handbook of Toxicology of Chemical Warfare 
Agents. London, UK: Elsevier; 2015: 287–298.
550
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 20. Tourinsky SD, Sciuto AM. Toxic inhalational injury and toxic industrial chemicals. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical 
Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 340–365.
 21. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Lung damaging agents: toxic industrial chemicals. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 5th ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 1–14.
 22. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Cyanide. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 5th ed. 
Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 16-27.
 23. Baskin SI, Kelly JB, Maliner BI, Rockwood GA, Zoltani CK. Cyanide poisoning. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical Aspects 
of Chemical Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 372–397.
 24. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Incapacitating agents. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical Casualties 
Handbook. 5th ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 89–102.
 25. Ketchum JS, Salem H. Incapacitating agents. In: Tourinsky SD, ed. Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, 
DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 412–432.
 26. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Riot-control agents. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 5th ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 103–114.
 27. Salem H, Gutting BW, Kluchinsky TA, Boardman CH, Tourinsky SD, Hout JJ. Riot-control agents. In: Tourinsky SD, 
ed. Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2008: 442–473.
 28. Health Service Support in a Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Environment: Tactics, Techniques and Procedures. Washington, 
DC: Department of the Army; October 1, 2002. FM 4-02. 7 (FM 8-10-7).
 29. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Decontamination. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 
5th ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 115–122.
 30. Hurst G, ed. Chemical Casualty Care Division’s Field Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 4th ed. Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Chemical Defense; 2014: 116–165.
 31. Hurst G, Stich J, Byrne T, et al. Casualty management in a contaminated area. In: Banks DE, ed. Medical Management 
of Chemical Casualties Handbook. 5th ed. Fort Detrick; MD: Borden Institute; 2014: 123–134.
 32. Meselson M, Guillemin J, Hugh-Jones M, et al. The Sverdlovsk anthrax outbreak of 1979. Science. 1994;266:1202–1208.
 33. Alibek K, Handelman S. Biohazard: The Chilling True Story of the Largest Covert Biological Weapons Program in the WorldTold From Inside by the Man Who Ran It. New York, NY: Random House; 1999: 51–133.
 34. Martin JW, Christopher GW, Eitzen EM. History of biological weapons: from poison darts to intentional epidemics. 
In: Dembek ZF, ed. Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2007: 2–16.
 35. Cole LA. Clouds of Secrecy: The Army’s Germ Warfare Tests Over Populated Areas. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield; 
1988: 44–175.
 36. Duelfer C. Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD. Washington, DC: US Central Intelligence 
Agency; 2004. https:// www.cia.gov/library/reports/general-reports-1iraq_wmd_2004/note.html. Accessed March 27, 
2017. 
 37. Torok TJ, Tauxe RV, Wise RP, et al. A large community outbreak of salmonellosis caused by intentional contamination 
of restaurant salad bars. JAMA. 1997;278:389–395.
 38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: Investigation of bioterrorism-related inhalational anthrax and 
interim guidelines for exposure management and antimicrobial therapy. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2001;50:909–919.
551
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
 39. Noah D, Huebner KD, Darling RG, et al. The history and threat of biological warfare and terrorism. Emerg Med Clin 
North Am. 2002;20:255–271.
 40. Volchkov V, Volchkova V, Muhlberger E, et al. Recovery of infectious Ebola virus from complimentary DNA: RNA 
editing of the GP gene and viral cytotoxicity. Science. 2001;5510:1965–1969. 
 41. National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity. Addressing Bio-security Concerns Related to the Synthesis of Select Agents. 
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; 2006: 2–18.
 42. Rotz LD, Khan AS, Lillibridge SR, et al. public health assessment of potential biological terrorism agents. Emerg Infect 
Dis. 2002;8:225.
 43. Purcell BK, Worsham PL, Friedlander AM. Anthrax. In: Dembek ZF, ed. Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2007: 70–80.
 44. Freedman A, Olubunmi A, Chang MW, et al. cutaneous anthrax associated with microangiopathic hemolytic anemia 
and coagulopathy in a 7-month-old infant. JAMA. 2002;287(7):869–874.
 45. Inglesby TV, O’Toole T, Henderson DA, et al. Anthrax as a biological weapon. JAMA. 2002;287:2236–2252.
 46. Mayer T. Clinical presentation of inhalational anthrax following bioterrorism. JAMA. 2001;286(20):2549–2553.
 47. Krol CM. Dynamic CT Features of inhalational anthrax. Am J Roentgenol. 2002:178:1063–1066. 
 48. Alves DA, Cieslak TJ, Culpepper RC, et al. Anthrax. In: Dembek ZF, ed. USAMRIID’s Medical Management of Biological 
Casualties Handbook. 7th ed. Fort Detrick, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases; 2011: 25–34.
 49. Jernigan JA, Stephens DS, Ashford DA, et al. Bioterrorism-related inhalational anthrax: the first 10 cases reported in 
the United States. Emerg Infect Dis. 2001;7:933–944.
 50. Griffith KS, Mead P, Armstrong GL, et al. Bioterrorism-related inhalational anthrax in an elderly woman—Connecticut 
2001. Emerg Infect Dis. 2003;9:681–688.
 51. Worsham PL, McGovern TW, Vietri NJ, Friedlander AM. Plague. In: Dembek ZF, ed. Medical Aspects of Biological 
Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2007: 92–113.
 52. Inglesby TV, David T, Dennis DT, et al. Plague as a biological weapon: medical and public health management. JAMA. 
2000;283:2281–2290.
 53. Alves DA, Cieslak TJ, Culpepper RC, et al. Plague. In Dembek ZF, ed. USAMRIID’s Medical Management of Biological 
Casualties Handbook. 7th ed. Fort Detrick, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases; 2011: 55-63.
 54. Barns SM, Grow CC, Okinaka RT, et al. Detection of diverse new Francisella-like bacteria in environmental samples. 
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005;71(9)5494–5500.
 55. Hepburn MJ, Friedlander AM, Dembek ZF. Tularemia. In: Dembek ZF, ed. Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2007: 168–177.
 56. Dennis DT, Inglesby TV, Henderson DA, et al. Tularemia as a biological weapon: medical and public health management. JAMA. 2001;285:2763–2773.
 57. Alves DA, Cieslak TJ, Culpepper RC, et al. Tularemia. In: Dembek ZF, ed. USAMRIID’s Medical Management of Biological 
Casualties Handbook. 7th ed. Fort Detrick, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases; 2011: 75-81.
 58. Jarhling PB, Huggins JW, Ibrahim MS, Lawler JV, Martin JW. Smallpox and related orthopox viruses. In: Dembek ZF, 
ed. Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2007: 216–233.
552
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 59. Henderson DA, Inglesby TV, Bartlett JG, et al. Smallpox as a biological weapon: medical and public health management. JAMA. 1999;281(22):2127–2137.
 60. Alves DA, Cieslak TJ, Culpepper RC, et al. Smallpox. In: Dembek ZF, ed. USAMRIID’s Medical Management of Biological 
Casualties Handbook. 7th ed. Fort Detrick, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases; 2011: 85–94.
 61. Preston R. The Demon in the Freezer. New York, NY: Random House; 2002: 32–48.
 62. Chevalier MS, Chung W, Smith J, et al. Ebola virus disease cluster in the United States—Dallas County, Texas, 2014. 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(46):1087–1088.
 63. Jahrling PB, Mart AM, Geisbert TW. Viral hemorrhagic fevers. In: Dembek ZF, ed. Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare. 
Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2007: 272–294.
 64. Borio L, Inglesby T, Peters CJ, et al. Hemorrhagic fever viruses as biological weapons: medical and public health 
management. JAMA. 2002;287:2391–2404. 
 65. Danzig R, Sageman M, Leighton T, et al. Aum Shinrikyo: Insights Into How Terrorists Develop Biological and Chemical 
Weapons. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security; December 2012: 18–29.
 66. Alves DA, Cieslak TJ, Culpepper RC, et al. Viral hemorrhagic fevers. In: Dembek ZF, ed. USAMRIID’s Medical Management of Biological Casualties Handbook. 7th ed. Fort Detrick, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious 
Diseases; 2011: 103–118.
 67. Dembek ZF, Smith LA, Rusnak JM. Botulinum toxin. In: Dembek ZF, ed. Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare. Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2007: 338–346.
 68. Arnon SS, Schechter R, Inglesby TV, et al. Botulinum toxin as a biological weapon: medical and public health management. JAMA. 2001;285(8):1059–1070.
 69. Zalinski RA. Iraq’s biological weapons: the past as future? JAMA. 1997;278:418–424.
 70. Blix H. Disarming Iraq. New York, NY: Pantheon Books; 2004: 15–40.
 71. Alves DA, Cieslak TJ, Culpepper RC, et al. Botulinum. In: Dembek ZF, ed. USAMRIID’s Medical Management of Biological Casualties Handbook. 7th ed. Fort Detrick, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases; 2011: 
212–128.
 72. Poli MA, Roy C, Huebner KD, et al. Ricin. In: Dembek ZF, ed. Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare. Washington, DC: 
Borden Institute; 2007: 324–332.
 73. Audi J, Belson M, Patel M, et al. Ricin poisoning: a comprehensive review. JAMA. 2005:294(18):2342–2351.
 74. Alves DA, Cieslak TJ, Culpepper RC, et al. Ricin. In: Dembek ZF, ed. USAMRIID’s Medical Management of Biological 
Casualties Handbook. 7th ed. Fort Detrick, MD: US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases; 2011: 129–133.
 75. International Atomic Energy Agency. Fukushima nuclear accident update log. https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/
fukushima-nuclear-accident-update-log-15. Accessed April 7, 2017.
 76. United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. UNSCEAR assessments of the Chernobyl 
accident. http://www.unscear.org/unscear/en/chernobyl.html. Accessed July 4, 2018.
 77. Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute. Medical Management of Radiological Casualties. 4th ed. Bethesda, MD: 
AFRRI; July 2013.
 78. Waselenko JK, MacVittie TJ, Blakely WF, et al. Medical management of acute radiation syndrome: recommendations 
of the National Stockpile Working Group. Ann Int Med. 2004;140(12):1037–1051.
553
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive Threats
 79. National Security Staff, Interagency Policy Coordination Subcommittee for Preparedness and Response to Radiological and Nuclear Threats. Planning Guidance for a Response to a Nuclear Detonation. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: National 
Security Staff; June 2010. https://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1821-25045-3023/planning_guidance_
for_response_to_a_nuclear_detonation___2nd_edition_final.pdf. Accessed May 15, 2018.
 80. Plurad DS. Blast injuries. Mil Med. 2011;176:276.
 81. Wolf SJ, Bebarta VS, Bonnett CJ, et al. Blast injuries. Lancet. 2009;374:405–415.
554
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
