179
Enlisted Service Members
Chapter 12
ENLISTED SERVICE MEMBERS
ALTHEA GREEN, PhD*
INTRODUCTION 
HISTORY OF ENLISTED SERVICE MEMBERS IN MILITARY MEDICINE 
RANK STRUCTURE
Junior Enlisted Promotions
Noncommissioned Officer/Petty Officer Promotions
ROLE OF NONCOMMISSIONED/PETTY OFFICERS
Standard Bearer
Chain of Command and Support Channel
Relationship Between Officers and Noncommissioned or Petty Officers
Supporting the Chain of Command
Backbone of the Units
Unit History and Traditions
Supervising and Training Junior Enlisted Members
An Important Balance 
ENLISTED TRAINING 
Technical Training
Specialty and Leadership Training
Unit Training 
ASSIGNMENT OF ENLISTED PERSONNEL
Garrison Healthcare Units
Operational Units 
SPECIAL CATEGORY ENLISTED MEDICAL PERSONNEL
Independent Duty Medical Technician 
Independent Duty Corpsman
Special Forces Medical Sergeant
SUMMARY
*Command Sergeant Major, US Army (Retired); Director, Recruitment and Outreach, F. Edward Hébert School of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
180
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 “The American soldier is a proud one and he demands professional competence in his leaders. In battle, he wants to know that the 
job is going to be done right, with no unnecessary casualties. The noncommissioned officer wearing the chevron is supposed to be the 
best soldier in the platoon and he is supposed to know how to perform all the duties expected of him. The American soldier expects his 
sergeant to be able to teach him how to do his job. And he expects even more from his officers.”
—General Omar N. Bradley, from a speech at the US Military Academy, May 20, 19521
INTRODUCTION
It is important for military medical officers to understand how enlisted members fit into the general 
scheme of the military as well as their role in military 
medical practice. Since the inception of the US military, one of its hallmarks has been the involvement 
of enlisted members in almost every facet of military 
operations. In both warfighting units and support 
units, including medical units, enlisted personnel 
constitute the majority of uniformed personnel. Enlisted medical personnel provide patient care, laboratory and diagnostic services, pharmacy support, 
and patient records maintenance; they also operate, 
maintain, and repair medical equipment. The enlisted 
service members are led by noncommissioned officers 
(NCOs) who have been promoted up through the 
ranks. These individuals form the foundation of the 
military health system. 
This chapter provides an overview of the enlisted service members typically involved in military 
medicine operations. It includes a brief history of the 
enlisted medical force, then discusses how enlisted 
service members are integrated into military medical 
practice. The discussion will include:
 
• rank structure of enlisted personnel;
 
• the roles of NCOs and petty officers (POs, 
NCOs in the Navy and Coast Guard);
 
• training of enlisted personnel;
 
• assignment of enlisted personnel; and
 
• special categories of enlisted medical personnel.
HISTORY OF ENLISTED SERVICE MEMBERS IN MILITARY MEDICINE
When George Washington’s Continental Army 
formed the Army and Navy medical services in 1775, 
provisions were made to detail enlisted personnel to 
assist the medical officers. Based on the recommendations of the Hospital Department’s director general, the 
Second Continental Congress authorized the employment of enlisted men as hospital stewards on July 17, 
1776. 2 While hospital stewards initially had no official 
rank in the Army and consisted of soldiers detailed 
from the line, they played a key role in providing 
healthcare for troops. They had to be able to read and 
write, with some background in mathematics, chemistry, or pharmacy. Few soldiers of the era had these abilities. The duties of hospital stewards included assisting 
the surgeon in minor surgical procedures, dispensing 
medicine, and supervising attendants and other civilians who worked in the hospitals. Hospital stewards 
were also responsible for procuring vegetables, meat, 
and bread from the local farmers and bakers when the 
normal supply system was interrupted. Some stewards 
worked in the military apothecary supervising the 
production of medicine. Based on the isolated nature 
of some medical officer assignments and the need for 
scientifically educated associates, both the Army and 
the Navy established dedicated enlisted corps in the 
late 19th century.
As their roles expanded after the Civil War, these 
enlisted members were given the added responsibility to purchase whatever was necessary for use in the 
care of the sick and wounded, and were expected to 
handle major administrative and logistical functions 
in the hospital. Dr Edward Cutbush (Figure 12-1), a 
prominent Navy physician, published the first manual 
on hospital administration in 1808. 2 In it, he specified 
the duties of a hospital steward, including discipline 
of staff and patients, personnel management, food 
service, medical supply, and overall administration of 
the hospital. 2 Cutbush also emphasized that a steward 
needed to be honest and above reproach. 2 These types 
of administrative duties have remained in the wheelhouse of hospital stewards and medical NCOs/POs 
even as their duties have evolved over time.
Throughout the years, the size and functions of the 
services’ medical departments have waxed and waned. 
When the Air Force Medical Service was established in 
1949, it included a complement of enlisted personnel. 
Today, the medical services of the Army, Air Force, and 
Navy all include an enlisted corps. Unlike the hospital 
stewards of old, these enlisted personnel are likely to 
occupy a diverse range of military occupations in fixed 
healthcare facilities as well as operational units. Their 
services can be generally categorized into the following functions: force health protection, health service 
support operations, and health support planning. 3 It is 
important to note that although the enlisted members 
are an integral part of the medical department of each 
181
Enlisted Service Members
Figure 12-1. Dr Edward Cutbush (1772–1843), a Navy 
surgeon from 1799 to 1829; portrait published in Annals of 
Medical History, December 1923. 
Reproduced from: Naval History and Heritage Command, 
NH 92584 (https://www.history.navy.mil/content/history/
nhhc/our-collections/photography/numerical-list-of-images/
nhhc-series/nh-series/NH-92000/NH-92584.html).
of the services, they also form a separate corps of specially trained personnel within the departments. Like 
their officer counterparts (medical, dental, nurse, etc) 
the enlisted corps is headed by a senior NCO, usually 
the senior enlisted advisor to the surgeon general. 
Army medicine’s enlisted corps birthday is recognized 
as March 1, 1887, and the Navy recognizes June 17, 
1898, as the birthday of its Hospital Corps. 
RANK STRUCTURE
Because of the nature of today’s operations, medical 
officers perform duty alongside enlisted members of 
any of the services, so it is important to understand 
the general rank structure of each service. Although 
each has its own unique rank designation, they are 
similar in grade structure: the enlisted grades range 
from E-1 to E-9, and similar to the officer grades, the 
lower numbers reflect junior rank. While it is not unusual for some enlisted personnel to start their careers 
at the grades of E-3 or E-4, junior members typically 
have less responsibility within their organizations. The 
services’ enlisted ranks correspond with each grade, 
ranging from private/seaman/airman to command 
sergeant major/master chief PO/command chief master 
sergeant. Leadership responsibility generally increases 
as the grade increases. (The Public Health Service is 
a commissioned corps and does not have enlisted 
members.) Figure 12-2 lists the enlisted ranks in each 
service and depicts their insignia. 
Junior Enlisted Promotions
Each of the services has a system that allows their 
enlisted personnel to advance through the ranks. For 
the Army and Air Force, the unit commander is the 
promotion authority for promotions to the grades of 
E-2, E-3, and E-4. These promotions are automatic, 
based on service members’ time in service and time in 
grade. The Navy limits these automatic promotions to 
E-2 and E-3. Commanders are also allowed to perform 
accelerated promotions at the junior grades based on 
specific criteria. Promotions to the higher ranks also 
vary among the services. 
Noncommissioned Officer/Petty Officer 
Promotions
The Army uses a semi-centralized system to determine promotions to the grades of E-5 and E-6. This 
process is based on a point system that begins at the 
unit level, where administrative points are awarded. 
A soldier receives points for duty performance as 
well as various accomplishments, such as military 
decorations, physical fitness test scores, military and 
civilian education, and weapons qualification scores. 
The soldier must also appear before a promotion board 
comprised of NCOs and chaired by a sergeant major 
(SGM) or command sergeant major (CSM). Board 
members ask a series of questions and score each 
candidate in four separate areas. The average board 
points are added to the administrative points and the 
candidate is placed on the recommended promotion 
list. Promotions from the list are made based on vacancies within military occupational specialties. 
182
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 12-2. Rank insignia of the US Armed Forces.
Reproduced from: https://www.army.mil/e2/downloads/rv7/symbols/ranks.pdf.
183
Enlisted Service Members
Navy promotions to grades E-4 through E-7 are 
competitive and based on advancement exams conducted at the local level. The Navy uses a promotion 
point system called the Final Multiple Score, which 
considers the whole person by calculating a candidate’s performance, experience, and knowledge. 
Performance, documented in fitness reports, is shown 
by a person’s work ethic and achievements. Experience is indicated by elements such as time-in-service 
and time-in-rate, and knowledge is demonstrated 
by how the candidate performs on the promotion 
examination. 
The Air Force promotes its personnel to E-5, E-6, 
and E-7 using the Weighted Airman Promotion System 
(WAPS). An airman receives points based on time-ingrade, as well as his or her scores on the promotion 
fitness examination and the specialty knowledge test. 
Points are also awarded for awards and decorations, 
as well as for enlisted performance ratings. The points 
are totaled, and those with the most WAPS points are 
selected for promotion. 
All of the services use some type of centralized 
board process to determine promotion selections to 
the highest enlisted grades. The Army and Navy use 
a centralized system for promotions to the grades of 
E-7, E-8, and E-9. Selection panels review candidates’ 
personnel records and select the best qualified for 
promotion based on set criteria. For E-8 and E-9 promotions, the Air Force uses a combination of WAPS 
points and a centralized promotion board that reviews 
the individual promotion record. The WAPS points 
are the same as used in E-5 through E-7 promotions, 
except there is only one promotion test, the Air Force 
supervisory examination. 
ROLE OF NONCOMMISSIONED/PETTY OFFICERS
It is important to understand the special role that 
NCOs/POs have in serving as a lynchpin between the 
officer and enlisted ranks. NCOs trace their roots to the 
beginnings of American military history. They helped 
Washington preserve the Continental Army at Valley 
Forge, and today are unrivaled by any military in the 
world. These service members are more than just ordinary soldiers, sailors, or airmen. Rather, the corps of 
NCOs/POs is comprised of trained professionals who 
have risen through the ranks and have been led and 
mentored by other senior members of their profession. 
They are integral to the functioning of every military 
organization; they provide the glue that holds their 
units together. NCOs/POs are found at every level of 
organizations in garrison, at sea, and while deployed. 
In medical units, the role of the NCO/PO is the same 
as in any other military unit, to support the chain of 
command, lead, and take care of the enlisted members. 
Table 12-1 depicts some of these relationships and 
roles, just a few of the myriad roles that exist within the 
military health system and the services. Most of these 
roles are formally prescribed by authorization documents, but it is not unusual for unit leaders to devise 
officer–NCO/PO pairings because they are necessary 
for the optimal functioning of the organization. 
Standard Bearer
The NCO/PO is expected to be the standard bearer 
of the organization, someone who not only espouses 
the standards but also enforces them. These standards 
vary slightly across the services and are based on 
regulations, each service’s mission, customs, and traditions. Each service has and follows its own creed and 
TABLE 12-1 
EXAMPLES OF OFFICER–NONCOMMISSIONED OR PETTY OFFICER SUPPORT RELATIONSHIPS
Officer Position
Corresponding Noncommissioned or Petty Officer Position
Surgeon general of the Army/Navy/Air Force
Command sergeant major/force master chief/chief master sergeant
Hospital commander
Hospital senior enlisted leader/command sergeant major
Section officer in charge
Section noncommissioned officer/petty officer in charge
Clinic officer in charge
Clinic superintendent/noncommissioned officer or petty officer in charge
Brigade surgeon
Operations noncommissioned officer
Company/flight commander
First sergeant
Platoon leader
Platoon sergeant
Head nurse
Ward master 
 
184
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
core values, which provide a value structure that all 
service members—officer and enlisted—are expected 
to live by and demonstrate. Although each service 
subscribes to slightly different values (Exhibit 12-1), 
ethical leadership is a common pillar of life in the 
military. NCOs/POs are expected to take a leadership 
role, not only in modeling service values, but also in 
teaching them to others. 
Chain of Command and Support Channel 
A foundational feature of every military organization, the chain of command establishes the lines 
of authority and communication, as well as the 
requisite levels of responsibility and accountability 
for conducting day-to-day mission operations. 4 The 
chain of command promotes unity of purpose by 
facilitating an efficient communication process for 
commanders to convey their guidance and intent to 
members of their organization, ensuring that orders 
are accurately and effectively communicated. It also 
provides a mechanism for members of the unit to share 
their concerns, achieve clarity for complex issues, and 
resolve problems. 
The NCO/PO support channel parallels, supplements, and reinforces the chain of command. It is comprised of NCOs/POs from senior to junior level, and is 
used for exchanging information, issuing instructions, 
and accomplishing the day-to-day business of the 
organization. This support channel provides an essential link in the chain of command because it allows 
NCOs/POs to add their perspective and experience to 
assist commanders and officers in accomplishing the 
mission. It is important to note that the NCO/PO support channel must never supersede the commander’s 
role. 
Relationship Between Officers and Noncommissioned or Petty Officers 
The morale of a unit, as well as how effectively its 
mission is accomplished, is a direct reflection of the 
relationship between the officers and NCOs/POs of 
the organization. Officers and NCOs/POs must work 
together to accomplish their unit’s mission. Although 
their roles are established by the various Tables of Organization & Equipment and Tables of Distribution & 
Allowances, this works best when they know and trust 
each other. New medical officers are typically paired 
with NCOs/POs who have more service experience. 
For example, a new medical platoon leader may have 
1 or 2 years of service, and the platoon NCO a decade 
of operational experience. In these situations, NCOs/
POs have the opportunity to show their abilities and 
determination to support and enforce the units’ standards and mission, as well as demonstrate effective 
leadership of the enlisted force. A key competency 
for success is the NCO/PO’s ability to understand and 
explain the commander’s intent. This understanding, 
coupled with the earned trust to execute it, is the foundation of the officer–NCO/PO relationship. In more senior assignments the years of experience may become 
more equal, but the NCO/PO will always play a key 
role in helping the officer achieve the mission. Their 
relationship greatly contributes to unity of command, 
ensures continuity of mission, and instills confidence 
that orders will be carried out promptly and effectively. The benefit of this system is that it ensures no 
disruption or loss of momentum to the mission in the 
absence of the commissioned officer leader. 5 
Developing a positive and professional relationship 
between the commissioned officer and enlisted leader 
requires diligence and frequent self-assessment. Each 
role comes with its own responsibilities and expectations of performance. A positive and professional 
relationship between these two leaders creates and 
sustains a healthy and productive organizational/
command climate. NCOs/POs who enjoy a close relationship with their officers find it one of the most 
satisfying parts of their service. It is important to remember that the officer is in command, and the NCO/
PO is a principal advisor and a source of competence 
and counsel who enhances the officer’s ability to command effectively. 5 
In military units, newly commissioned officers will 
benefit greatly from the advice and counsel of seasoned 
enlisted leaders who will help guide them in their role 
as the officer in charge or commander of the platoon, 
flight, or section. According to First Sergeant Jeffrey 
J. Mellinger:
A new lieutenant is a precious thing, a rare commodity, enthusiastic and eager to learn. Don’t take advanEXHIBIT 12-1
MILITARY SERVICE VALUES
 
• Army Values: Loyalty, Duty, Respect, Selfless 
Service, Honesty, Integrity, Personal Courage. 
 
• Navy and Marine Corps Values: Honor, 
Courage, Commitment.
 
• Air Force Values: Integrity First, Service Before Self, Excellence in All We Do.
 
• Public Health Service Values: Leadership, 
Service, Integrity, Excellence
185
Enlisted Service Members
tage of him, but train him, correct him when he needs 
it (remembering that diplomacy is part of your job 
description), and be ready to tell the world proudly 
that he’s yours. If you are ashamed of him, maybe 
it’s because you’ve neglected him or failed to train 
him properly. Do something about it. Show a genuine concern that he’s learning the right way instead 
of the easy way. But be careful not to undermine his 
authority or destroy his credibility. Remember that 
order and counter-order create disorder. . . . As the 
senior and most experienced NCO in the platoon, 
you must pass on the benefit of [your] wisdom and 
experience to your platoon leader as well as to the 
soldiers. 6
As officers gain more experience, they develop a 
more refined and informed perspective, and they are 
often paired with NCOs/POs of similar experience 
level. The relationships between NCOs/POs and officers tend to be more reciprocal as officers move up in 
rank and time in service. Nevertheless, the professional 
development and maturation of officers can be shaped 
positively by their interaction with the right NCOs/
POs throughout their careers. Vignette 12-1 provides 
a constructed illustration based on actual experience 
of a platoon sergeant establishing a relationship with 
a new officer, while Figure 12-3 shows a PO working 
with an officer in common pursuit of mission goals. 
Vignette 12-1. Sergeant First Class (SFC) Johnson met 
his new platoon leader, Second Lieutenant (2LT) Vaughn, 
at the Division Reception Station. The lieutenant had been 
on the island just 2 weeks, and this was her first permanent 
duty assignment. She had already completed installation 
in-processing, and had also been issued two duffel bags of 
field gear. SFC Johnson took his new platoon leader to meet 
with the company commander while he went to check on the 
troops in the motor pool, who were getting ready for a field 
exercise in a few days. The commander wanted to brief 2LT 
Vaughn on the upcoming exercise and make sure she was 
ready for it. SFC Johnson spent a few minutes getting an 
update from the squad leaders, then linked back up with 2LT 
Vaughn at the commander’s office. 
SFC Johnson then took his new platoon leader to the 
platoon area and showed her the designated area for storage of her gear. 2LT Vaughn noticed that each soldier was 
assigned a similar area, and she could see the gear neatly 
stored inside. Next, SFC Johnson took 2LT Vaughn to the 
office they were to share. After a few pleasantries, SFC 
Johnson got down to business. He pulled out a platoon roster 
and a training schedule. They were getting ready for a major 
field training exercise, and he knew it was his job to make 
sure his platoon leader was ready to go.
Army company/detachment commanders and their 
first sergeants (as well as their less common sister service counterparts) have a special relationship. This is 
usually the first time an officer has command of service 
members with the authority to administer punishment. 
The command team is generally comprised of an officer with 4 to 6 years of service and a senior NCO/PO 
with two or three times as much service. It is important 
that the senior NCO/PO is disciplined and mature, and 
provides sound advice to the company commander, 
especially in matters of the administration of justice. A 
dysfunctional command team will negatively affect the 
morale of the unit. On the other hand, a positive and 
professional relationship between the NCO/PO and 
officer will create and sustain a healthy and productive organizational/command climate. In 1825, Major 
General Jacob Brown wrote:
There is no individual of a company, scarcely excepting the captain himself, on whom more depends for 
its discipline, police, instruction, and general well-being, than on the first sergeant. This is a grade replete 
with cares and with responsibility. Its duties place 
its incumbent in constant and direct contact with 
the men, exercising over them an influence the more 
powerful as it is immediate and personal; and all 
experience demonstrates that the condition of every 
company will improve or deteriorate nearly in proportion to the ability and worth of its first sergeant. 7 
Supporting the Chain of Command
Commanders and commissioned officers set policies 
and standards, and NCOs/POs ensure discipline and 
adherence to standards by all of the unit’s personnel—
enlisted, officer, and civilian. All leaders should work 
together to accomplish the mission, and members 
Figure 12-3. A US Navy chief, left, and a US Navy lieutenant junior grade, center, both medical professionals with a 
provincial reconstruction team, talk with a director of public 
health, right, during a key leader engagement in Afghanistan. 
US Navy photo by Lt. J.G. Matthew Stroup.
Reproduced from: http://www.dodlive.mil/2012/12/14/
provincial-reconstruction-team-farah/.
186
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
of the NCO corps are expected to lead by example. 
Because of the level at which they operate, NCOs/
POs have the greatest influence on how an organization’s goals are achieved. NCOs/POs are the technical 
and functional experts within their organizations, 
and subordinates and superiors alike draw upon the 
expertise and experience of these leaders to achieve 
mission objectives and depend on them as leaders 
and managers. They are expected to acquire and employ resources efficiently and effectively, and think 
critically to prevent and solve problems. They must 
also be able to clearly communicate up and down the 
chain of command and NCO/PO support channel, as 
well as laterally across matrix organizations (a typical 
structure of many healthcare organizations where staff 
has dual reporting relationships; eg, an NCO working 
in the hospital as a laboratory technician might also 
be the senior NCO in a platoon in the troop command 
for the hospital). One of their most important responsibilities is to provide the commander and officer corps 
with unique insights and perspectives of the enlisted 
members while providing an enlisted voice in matters 
concerning operations, administration, readiness, and 
the well-being of the force.
Backbone of the Units
NCOs/POs are known as the “backbone” of the 
armed forces. Their job is to complement the officer 
and enable the force by both accomplishing their organization’s mission and ensuring their subordinates’ 
welfare. They are able to achieve this by virtue of the 
command authority derived from their delegated 
leadership position, as well as general military authority granted to all who wear the chevrons of the NCO/
PO. This empowers them with the responsibility and 
authority to maintain good order and discipline at all 
times, whether on or off duty. 5 Through their training and experience, NCOs/POs develop professional 
qualities, competencies, and traits that complement 
the officer corps, and they provide an indispensable 
and irreplaceable linkage between command guidance and mission execution. 4 In many respects, they 
provide the social order and structure that underpin 
high-functioning military organizations. 
Unit History and Traditions 
NCOs/POs have special responsibilities with regard to maintaining the history and traditions of their 
organizations. They are typically charged with all 
things ceremonial within the unit. The senior NCO/
PO each unit is traditionally known as the “Keeper of 
the Color.” This designation traces its roots to the position of color sergeant, the individual on the battlefield 
who carried the colors and directed the movements 
of a unit. Over the years, with advances in firepower, 
flags were no longer used in this manner, but flags 
and guidons continue to play an important role in 
defining unit identity and building cohesion and esprit 
de corps. The high honor bestowed to a unit’s senior 
enlisted member as custodian of its flag or guidon is a 
tremendous responsibility and reflects the continuity 
of the unit in a very personal way. 
The responsibility of NCOs/POs to preserve the 
unit’s traditions and heritage includes teaching new 
service members about the history of these important 
aspects of military service, including training in drill 
and ceremony. Drill and ceremony, including parades, 
reviews, retreat, and other recognitions, add pageantry 
to military life but also symbolize the shared values, 
courage, and discipline essential to any successful 
military organization (Figure 12-4). Drill and ceremony 
is the foundation for instilling and developing discipline in units of all sizes, and remains one of the finest 
methods for developing confidence and troop leading 
abilities in subordinate leaders. 5 This discipline forms 
the basis for adherence to service values as well as a 
culture that motivates service members to subordinate 
their personal needs to the good of the organization.
Supervising and Training Junior Enlisted 
Members 
Another important responsibility is the supervision 
and training of the unit’s junior enlisted service memFigure 12-4. The Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson’s color 
guard prepares to present the colors during a Memorial Day 
Ceremony at Delaney Park Strip in Anchorage, Alaska, May 
29, 2017. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. James Richardson.
Reproduced from: https://www.defense.gov/Photos/PhotoGallery/igphoto/2001754130/.
187
Enlisted Service Members
bers. The NCO/PO must ensure that their subordinates 
maintain proficiency not only in their technical skills, 
but also in other military competence areas such as 
survival skills and unit-required training. While the 
NCO/PO has responsibility for maintaining these requirements, training of medical skills is often a joint 
effort with the medical officer. Likewise, the NCO/PO, 
who often has the most military experience, is expected 
to share that practical knowledge and experience with 
his or her medical officer. 
An Important Balance 
While the duties of NCOs/POs are numerous and 
must all be taken seriously, the most important is taking care of enlisted service members. NCOs/POs do 
this by developing a genuine concern for their subordinates’ well-being, knowing and understanding their 
soldiers well enough to train them as individuals and 
teams to operate proficiently. This requires NCO/PO 
leaders to become involved in the lives of their subordinates in more ways than simply being a supervisor in 
the workplace. This responsibility includes all aspects 
of teaching, coaching, and mentoring, from advising 
about career development to providing guidance and 
assisting with family concerns. 
Effective leaders work diligently in developing 
relationships of mutual trust and respect with their 
people. This type of relationship will allow soldiers, 
sailors, and airmen to grow confident in their ability to 
perform well under the most difficult and demanding 
circumstances. However, as discussed above, NCOs/
POs must never appear to supersede the official chain 
of command or impede the accomplishment of the 
mission. They must understand their supporting role 
in providing guidance and executing the orders of 
the officers appointed over them. Vignette 12-2 is a 
constructed illustration of how NCOs/POs and officers 
work together to accomplish the unit mission while 
taking care of the needs of service members.
Vignette 12-2. Commander (CDR) Jones was the officer in charge (OIC) of the Pediatrics Clinic and had some 
concerns about her clinic petty officer in charge (POIC). The 
POIC, Hospital Corpsman First Class (HM1) Douglas, had 
arrived late to work five times in 2 weeks, and had even 
called in once to say he would not be coming in to work at 
all. CDR Jones had spoken with HM1 Douglas, who told her 
the reason for the tardiness and absences was that he was 
having trouble finding child care. CDR Jones was puzzled 
because she was not aware that HM1 Douglas had a child, 
but she was also concerned because she had detected the 
smell of alcohol on his breath.
CDR Jones enlisted the help of the NCO/PO support 
channel. She discussed the issue with Senior Chief Petty 
Officer (SCPO) Gilman, the POIC of the Department of 
Medicine. SCPO Gilman advised CDR Jones that HM1 
Douglas was not suitable to perform the duties of clinic POIC 
until the issue was resolved. In light of this issue, SCPO 
Gilman temporarily replaced HM1 Douglas with Technical 
Sergeant (TSgt) Cason, the assistant NCO in charge of the 
clinic. SCPO Gilman then met with HM1 Douglas and CDR 
Jones. Douglas initially denied any problems, but eventually 
admitted to arriving late for work and being absent due to 
oversleeping; however, he did not admit to having an alcohol 
or drug problem. SCPO Gilman informed HM1 Douglas that 
he was temporarily being reassigned from clinic POIC duties 
and she would provide him with further instructions after she 
met with the company first sergeant.
SCPO Gilman then met with the company first sergeant 
and verified HM1 Douglas’s family status. There was no 
evidence that Douglas had a child. She also discussed 
Douglas’s absences and his reporting for duty with the smell 
of alcohol on his breath. She recommended the commander 
refer HM1 Douglas for drug and alcohol screening and treatment. SCPO Gilman scheduled a meeting for HM1 Douglas, 
the company commander, and the first sergeant. She met 
with HM1 Douglas and notified him of the meeting. She also 
completed a written counseling to document the discussions, 
actions taken, and the way ahead.
This vignette showed how members of the NCO/
PO support channel work with the chain of command 
to accomplish the organization’s mission. Commander 
Jones, the clinic officer in charge, was able to engage 
with the NCO/PO support channel to address the issue with his clinic PO. The department’s petty office in 
charge, Senior Chief Petty Officer (SCPO) Gilman, had 
the authority to affect change within the clinic enlisted 
leadership. SCPO Gilman and the unit’s first sergeant, 
both members of the NCO/PO support channel, also 
worked together to get the commander’s involvement 
to refer HM1 Douglas for drug and alcohol screening 
and treatment. The NCO/PO support channel was also 
able work with the chain of command to intervene to 
assist HM1 Douglas as well as to make the necessary 
adjustments to support the clinic’s mission. 
ENLISTED TRAINING
Technical Training
Today’s enlisted medical force is among the most 
skilled and technically proficient in the military. Most 
medical service members receive their initial technical training at the Medical Education and Training 
Campus (METC) at Fort Sam Houston, Texas. METC 
is a state-of-the-art Department of Defense healthcare 
188
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
education campus that trains enlisted medical personnel from all of the military services, including the 
Coast Guard. Each year nearly 18,000 enlisted medical 
service members graduate from 48 different medical 
programs conducted at the METC. 8 
Training programs are grouped as follows: 
 
• ancillary services (nutrition/dietetics, occupational therapy, physical therapy, pharmacy);
 
• dental services (dental assisting, dental laboratory); 
 
• diagnostic services (medical laboratory, radiology, nuclear medicine); 
 
• healthcare support (biomedical equipment 
maintenance/repair, medical logistics, health 
care administration); 
 
• nursing and specialty medical (cardiovascular, cardiopulmonary, independent duty 
medical technicians, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, respiratory, surgical, urology); and
 
• public health (behavioral health, preventive 
medicine). 
A complete listing of courses offered at the METC 
can be found in the program catalog. The Army’s 
combat medical specialist/ healthcare specialist, as well 
as the Air Force’s medical technicians and the Navy’s 
corpsmen, are also trained at the METC. Many of these 
training programs are conducted in two phases in 
which students complete the didactic portion of their 
training at METC and then transition to various fixed 
medical facilities in the United States for the clinical 
phase (Figure 12-5). 
Figure 12-5. A US Air Force diagnostic imaging technician 
examines a computed tomography scan at the US Air Force 
Hospital Langley at Langley Air Force Base. 
Reproduced from: https://media.defense.gov/2016/
Mar/03/2001498776/-1/-1/0/160219-F-UN009-006.jpg. 
On August 21, 2015, Airman 1st Class Spencer 
Stone, along with two childhood friends, foiled a terror attack on a train from Amsterdam to Paris. After 
Stone used a chokehold to neutralize the gunman, his 
instincts as a trained medic took over as he rushed to 
save the life of a fellow passenger who was bleeding 
from a bullet wound. Realizing the need to stop the 
bleeding, Stone put his fingers into the open wound 
on the victim’s neck and applied pressure directly on 
the artery to stop the bleeding. Stone was able to react 
to the situation and use his lifesaving skills because of 
the training he received as a Basic Medical Technician 
Corpsman Program student at METC. 9
Specialty and Leadership Training
The military services also conduct specialty training 
at various camps, posts, and stations, including Fort 
Sam Houston. Each of the services also require their 
members to attend leadership training to prepare them 
to serve in positions of increased responsibility. Called 
professional military education (PME), this training 
can include a combination of technical training and 
general military leadership techniques. As NCOs/POs 
increase in rank, the training tends to be more leadership focused than technical. 
Arguably the most important promotion and transition for an enlisted service member is when they 
first transition from the junior enlisted rank to that 
of a NCO or PO. With promotion comes additional 
responsibility and authority, accompanied by higher 
accountability. This promotion is more than just a 
raise in pay; it often reflects a shift in roles from being led to learning how to lead others. Leadership 
education and training are designed to help equip 
service members with the skills and information they 
need to be effective leaders. PME provides NCOs/POs 
with progressive and sequential leader, technical, and 
tactical training relevant to the duties, responsibilities, and missions they will perform. The professional 
development of the NCO/PO corps is something that 
distinguishes the US military from other military 
services around the world. 
Basic leadership training incorporates a variety 
of leadership-related subjects that also help build a 
foundation for self-development. As NCOs/POs advance in rank, they attend successively higher levels 
of professional military education. As service members 
advance through their career, they will encounter 
certain windows of opportunity for completing leadership courses, either online or in residence. Courses 
consist of resident, mobile, and distributed-learning 
platforms designed to influence and provide the 
leadership foundation upon which each service bases 
189
Enlisted Service Members
its future NCO/PO corps. This training is essential to 
developing a highly trained and effective force. Each 
of the services sets specific milestones for completing 
online courses and attending in-residence NCO and 
senior NCO academies. The senior NCO academies 
conduct a capstone course to prepare NCOs/POs for 
the senior enlisted rank. 
For Army NCOs, the training and education process 
begins with an initial branch-immaterial leadership development course; followed by a basic branch-specific 
level; then an advanced branch-specific level; and 
finally a branch-immaterial senior-level course. The 
Army Medical Department NCO Academy provides 
sergeants, staff sergeants, and sergeants first class 
with the technical, tactical, and leadership/trainer 
skills necessary to be successful in Army operations as 
squad/platoon sergeants and first sergeants. Airmen 
are also required to complete distance learning courses 
before attending the academies. The Navy requires a 
combination of home-station and in-person training 
at its leadership academies. 
Earning college credit toward a degree or completing additional professional military courses are also 
important endeavors as service members progress in 
expertise and rank, and this should be encouraged. Additionally, special recognition programs are available 
for those who demonstrate the aptitude and motivation to compete. 
Unit Training
Training of the medical enlisted force does not 
end at the doors of the schoolhouse, but continues at 
units and organizations to which troops are assigned. 
NCOs/POs have primary responsibility for training 
the enlisted force, but accomplishing this becomes a 
team effort that also depends on officers and civilians. 
Keeping the force skilled and technically proficient, as 
well as assisting service members in meeting general 
military requirements such as physical fitness, requires 
an ongoing emphasis both in garrison and operational 
units. 
ASSIGNMENT OF ENLISTED PERSONNEL
Enlisted personnel can be found in almost every aspect of medical practice. After initial technical training, 
they are assigned to either garrison-based healthcare 
facilities or operational units. Although each of the 
services operates a distinct medical system within the 
military health system, both garrison and operational 
medicine are becoming more joint (Figure 12-6). 
Garrison Healthcare Units
Enlisted personnel are often assigned to garrison 
healthcare organizations directly after initial entry 
training, where they work side-by-side with civilian 
staff. The NCOs/POs are responsible for ensuring 
that new service members are fully integrated into 
the organization. In addition to technical and military 
readiness training, a key requirement is maintaining the standards of healthcare accrediting agencies, 
such as the Joint Commission and the Commission 
of Anatomical Pathologists. Leaders must also take 
measures to ensure their personnel remain current in 
their common military tasks and drills, which are also 
important for unit readiness. 
Operational Units
Medical personnel assigned to operational units 
must be able to fully integrate with and earn the trust 
and respect of the supported personnel. Army personnel are often assigned to operational units immediately 
following technical training, while Navy personnel 
may be assigned to operational Navy or Fleet Marine 
Force units. Regardless of their assignment, personnel often have additional, nonmedical roles to play in 
support of their operational unit. For example, medical 
personnel on a submarine must also understand how 
to fight fires and perform other tasks required of the 
crew. Such ongoing relationships between medical 
Figure 12-6. A medical team comprised of a US Air Force 
lieutenant, a US Air Force captain, a US Army sergeant, 
and a US Air Force lieutenant colonel prepare a patient for 
surgery at Craig Joint Theater Hospital on Bagram Airfield, 
Afghanistan. 
Reproduced from: https://www.defense.gov/Photos/PhotoGallery/igphoto/2001126859/.
190
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
personnel and operational personnel underscore an 
important cultural component to maintaining readiness.
One of the challenges of enlisted personnel in these 
units is balancing military readiness requirements 
with technical competency, especially for those service 
members who are not able to practice their medical 
skills on a routine basis. Leaders must take a proactive 
stance to ensure their personnel maintain competency 
in all of their critical skills.
In March 2008, Specialist Monica Lin Brown became 
the second female soldier since World War II to be 
awarded the Silver Star for extraordinary heroism. 
Brown was serving as a combat medic with the 82nd 
Airborne Division when she was involved in a firefight 
while supporting a patrol in Afghanistan. 10 Vignette 
12-3 provides a detailed account of Brown’s actions 
that earned her the award. 
Vignette 12-3. In March 2008 Specialist Monica Lin 
Brown was awarded the Silver Star for extraordinary heroism 
on April 25, 2007. Brown, then a private first class (PFC), 
was serving as a combat medic with the 4th Squadron, 73d 
Cavalry Regiment, 4th Brigade Combat Team, 82nd Airborne Division. On that day she was on a combat patrol with 
her platoon moving to Jani Khel, Afghanistan, for a leader 
engagement with village elders. The element consisted of 
five vehicles: four M1151 Up-armored HMMWVs and one 
Afghan National Army Ford Ranger. They were moving in 
column formation when the trail vehicle struck a pressure 
plate improvised explosive device (IED) on the driver’s side 
rear tire, which ignited the fuel tank and fuel cans mounted 
on the rear of the vehicle. The explosion of the fuel tank and 
cans engulfed the vehicle in an intense fireball. This initiated 
a planned ambush, which commenced after the explosion. 
The patrol began to take small arms fire, which began 
to concentrate on the IED site as the platoon medic, PFC 
Brown, moved on foot to evaluate the casualties. She was 
exposed to the small arms fire until the maneuver element 
could swing around and begin suppressing the enemy as she 
treated the wounded soldiers. After making an initial assessment and treating them in order of severity, she moved the 
casualties, with the aid and direction of the platoon sergeant, 
into the wadi the engulfed vehicle was hanging over, approximately 15 m from the vehicle. The enemy fighters then 
engaged the patrol with mortar fire. PFC Brown threw her 
own body over the casualties to shield them as the mortars 
were impacting 75 to 100 m away. Approximately 15 mortars 
impacted within close range of the casualties. PFC Brown 
continued treatment until the onboard 60-mm mortar, 5. 56mm ammunition, and 40-mm grenade rounds on board the 
burning vehicle began to explode. Again disregarding her 
own safety, PFC Brown shielded the casualties with her own 
body as large chunks of shrapnel and 5. 56-mm rounds from 
the vehicle began flying through the air. 
The patrol leader arrived on site and found it incredible that 
PFC Brown was still alive and treating the casualties amid 
the extremely dangerous conditions. The platoon sergeant 
was able to move her and the wounded soldiers to a more 
protected position as the explosions became even more 
intense, and she continued treatment even as the platoon 
returned fire in close vicinity. She shielded the wounded from 
falling brass and enemy fire once again, ensuring the casualties were stabilized and ready for MEDEVAC. 10
SPECIAL CATEGORY ENLISTED MEDICAL PERSONNEL
Three groups of enlisted service members deserve 
special mention: the Air Force’s independent duty 
medical technician (IDMT), Air Force specialty code 
4N0X1C; the Navy’s independent duty corpsman 
(IDC), Navy enlisted classification HM-8425/8494; and 
the Army’s Special Forces medical sergeant, military 
occupational specialty 18D. As the first two names 
imply, these service members are specially trained 
to operate independently in many different types of 
environments; however, the degree to which they 
can perform medical skills varies and is not related to 
their titles. Generally, their role is to serve under the 
supervision of a doctor or licensed provider in garrison; however, these special medical personnel are 
most often deployed to remote locations or to areas 
where there is no physician. 
Independent Duty Medical Technician 
The IDMT is an Air Force specialty with training 
conducted at the METC. Graduates of the program 
often deploy with Special Forces, security forces, or 
civil engineer units, but they sometimes deploy with 
Army and Navy units. IDMT training is also mandatory for 4N0X1 airmen prior to assignment at remote 
or isolated duty stations; assignments for medical 
support of nonmedical field units; or assignments 
for medical support to other government agencies or 
joint service missions as directed by the Department 
of Defense. 11 IDMT training includes obtaining medical histories; performing examinations, assessments, 
and treatments; and documenting patient care in 
the absence of a physician; as well as emergency 
medical, dental, and surgical procedures to stabilize 
patients prior to medical evacuation. IDMTs also 
receive instruction in general knowledge and procedural skills for medical administration, monitoring 
medical aspects of command-designated special 
interest programs and health promotion, advanced 
medication administration and dispensary operation, and basic laboratory procedures. The training 
program also addresses procedures for conducting 
occupational health services, preventive medicine, 
field hygiene, and food/water safety inspections in 
191
Enlisted Service Members
lieu of public health and bioenvironmental health 
personnel. The IDMT can operate independently 
when serving at remote sites in deployed settings 
or in approved alternative care locations; however, 
in all other cases, the IDMT provides care under the 
supervision of a preceptor (a designated physician 
or dentist who provides oversight, professional 
guidance, support, and training to the IDMT in all 
areas of medical/dental treatment related to their 
scope of practice). 11
Independent Duty Corpsman 
An IDC is a special hospital corpsman with the most 
diverse duty stations in the Navy, ranging from ships 
and submarines to shore duty throughout the United 
States and abroad, including service with Special Operations units such as the SEALs, special boat units, 
Marine raider battalions, and Marine reconnaissance 
units. IDCs are often assigned to isolated duty stations 
or vessels where there is no medical officer. All IDCs 
attend a 1-year course at the Navy’s Surface Warfare 
Medicine Institute in San Diego, California. 12 These 
corpsmen fulfill a variety of critical duties in support 
of Navy and Marine Corps missions as clinical or 
specialty technicians in more than 38 occupational specialties, including key administrative roles at military 
treatment facilities around the world. They also assist 
in the treatment and prevention of disease, serving 
side-by-side with medical officers, doctors, dentists, 
and nurses. 12 
Special Forces Medical Sergeant 
Special Forces medical sergeants provide medical 
care and treatment in support of conventional and 
unconventional warfare. Their training consists of 1 
year of formal medical training along with approximately 12 to 18 months of additional training specific 
to their role as Special Forces soldiers. The training is 
conducted at the Special Warfare Medical Group/Joint 
Special Operations Medical Training Center and the 
Special Warfare Training Group, both of which are part 
of the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and 
School/Special Operations Center of Excellence at Ft 
Bragg, North Carolina. These NCOs have a working 
knowledge of dentistry, veterinary care, public sanitation, water quality, and optometry. 
The duties of a Special Forces medical sergeant include ensuring detachment unit readiness, establishing 
and supervising medical and dental facilities to support conventional or unconventional operations with 
emergency, routine, and long-term medical care,13 as 
well as many other nonmedical duties. They provide 
initial medical and dental screening and perform a 
wide range of medical and ancillary services, including 
limited laboratory, radiology, and pharmacy requirements. 13 Special Forces personnel often work in remote 
areas far from medical care. To support these operations, Special Forces medical sergeants are skilled in 
trauma management and treat emergency and trauma 
patients in accordance with established medical and 
tactical combat casualty care principles. 
SUMMARY
In considering how enlisted members fit into 
military medical practice, an officer’s best option is 
to start with an understanding of the NCO/PO corps. 
While the enlisted members are the foundation of the 
military services, NCOs form their backbone. As such, 
they are responsible not only for the most of the dayto-day operations of military organizations, but they 
also bear primary responsibility for the welfare of the 
enlisted members. NCO/POs, who often have more 
time-in-service than officers, also have responsibility 
for assisting in training new officers. As officers achieve 
more rank and experience, their relationships with 
their NCO/PO counterparts become more reciprocal, 
but the NCOs/POs with whom they have had meaningful interactions throughout their careers will have 
shaped their maturation as officers. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Bradley ON. American military leadership. Army Inf Digest. 1953;Feb:5,6. https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp
. 39015084468829;view=1up;seq=87. Accessed July 27, 2017.
 
2. US Army Medical Department Office of Medical History. AMEDD NCO/enlisted soldier history. http://ameddregiment.amedd.army.mil/nco/historynco.html. Accessed July 27, 2017.
 
3. US Department of Defense. Health Service Support. Washington, DC: DoD; 2012. Joint Publication 4-02. http://www.
dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp4_02.pdf.
 
4. The Noncommissioned Officer and Petty Officer: Backbone of the Armed Forces. Washington, DC: National Defense University 
Press; 2014.
192
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
5. Hogan D, Fisch A, Wright R. The Story of the Noncommissioned Officer Corps: The Backbone of the Army. Washington, DC: 
Center of Military History; 2009.
 
6. Mellinger JJ. Open letters to three NCOs. Infantry. 1989;May-Jun:17–21. http://www.benning.army.mil/infantry/
magazine/issues/1989/MAY-JUN/pdfs/MAY-JUN1989.pdf. Accessed July 27, 2017. 
 
7. Letter from MG Jacob Brown to the Secretary of War, November 17, 1825. 19th Congress, 1st Session. American State Papers: Military Affairs. 3:110. https://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ampage?collId=llsp&fileName=018/llsp018.db&recNum=120. 
Accessed July 27, 2017. 
 
8. Medical Education & Training Campus 2016 Program Catalog. Joint Base San Antonio–Fort Sam Houston, TX; METC; 
2016. http://www.metc.mil/Catalog/METC_2016_Program_Catalog.pdf. Accessed December 27, 2016.
 
9. Hearst T. METC prepares future medics for any situation. Joint Base San Antonio News website. http://www.jbsa.mil/
News/News/Article/617569/metc-prepares-future-medics-for-any-situation/. Published September 17, 2015. Accessed 
December 22, 2016. 
 10. US Army Medical Department Office of Medical History. Army Medical Department Silver Star citation: Monica Lin 
Brown. http://ameddregiment.amedd.army.mil/silverstar/oifoef/oifoef1.html. Accessed July 27, 2017.
 11. Secretary of the Air Force. The Air Force Independent Duty Medical Technician Program. Washington, DC: USAF; 2013. 
Air Force Instruction 44-103. http://static.e-publishing.af.mil/production/1/af_sg/publication/afi44-103/afi44-103.pdf. 
Accessed January 3, 2017.
 12. US Navy. Training, Certification, Supervision Program, and Employment of Independent Duty Hospital Corpsmen (IDCs). 
Washington, DC: USN; 2007. OPNAV Instruction 6400. 1C. 
 13. US Department of the Army. Enlisted MOS Specifications. Washington, DC: HQDA; 2016. DA Pamphlet 611-21. https://
www.milsuite.mil/book/groups/smartbookdapam611-21. Accessed January 3, 2017.
