443
Rehabilitation and Reintegration
Chapter 31
REHABILITATION AND 
REINTEGRATION
OLUWASEYI GBADE-ALABI, MD,* and PAUL PASQUINA, MD†
INTRODUCTION
HISTORY OF REHABILITATION IN THE MILITARY
RECENT CHALLENGES IN COMBAT CASUALTY REHABILTIATION
ELEMENTS OF MILITARY REHABILITATION
Acute Care
Home Care
Sports and Recreation
Nonprofit Organizations
ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
REHABILITATION TEAM MEMBERS AND ROLES
GUIDANCE TO THE COMMANDING OFFICER
SUMMARY
*Major, Medical Corps, US Army; Chief, Inpatient Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, 
Maryland
†Professor and Chair, Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland; Chief, Department of Rehabilitation, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland
444
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Military medical officers (MMOs) must not only 
recognize the importance of optimizing human performance in preparing service members for deployment 
and mission success, but they must also be prepared 
to provide high quality of care for those injured in the 
line of duty. Combat casualty care and maintaining 
military readiness are fundamental functions of the 
Military Healthcare System (MHS) and are uniquely 
interconnected. Providing life- and limb-saving care 
on the battlefield directly impacts a unit’s combat effectiveness. Service members who are confident they 
will receive the best medical care in the event of an 
injury are far more likely to be willing to put their lives 
in harm’s way. The same holds true for their families 
and the American public who support them back 
home. They trust that if a service member is injured 
in the line of duty, they will receive state-of-the-art 
comprehensive care, ranging from life-saving procedures to advanced rehabilitation. MMOs must not 
only recognize and respect this trust, but be committed to dedicating their professional careers to honor 
this trust through activities such as life-long learning 
and skills acquisition; promoting injury prevention 
and wellness; and improving access and efficiency of 
care delivery. 
While significant emphasis in military medicine is 
centered on acute combat casualty care, saving lives is 
only the first step to “restoring” life after severe injury. 
To provide comprehensive care across the spectrum 
of care within the MHS, the military has generally 
divided its medical support of combat missions into 
five levels of care (Table 31-1). 1 Rehabilitation practices 
typically occur from Role 3 through Role 5.
This chapter provides an overview of rehabilitative 
and reintegration practices utilized within the MHS to 
care for combat casualties. The reader should come to 
understand the complicated course of recovery that 
faces the modern military casualty; the terms and 
definitions commonly used within the field of rehabilitation (Table 31-2); the roles and responsibilities of the 
specialists who commonly make up the interdisciplinary rehabilitative treatment team; and the role of the 
MMO in the successful rehabilitation and reintegration 
of the modern combat casualty.
TABLE 31-1 
MILITARY ROLES OF CARE
Role
Location
Medical Assets
Goals
Roles 1 and 2
Mobile medical assets deployed 
within the military theater of 
operation
1. Immediate first-responder 
care: self-aid, buddy aid, combat lifesaver 
2. Combat medic/corpsman 
(trained in combat casualty 
care)
1. Resuscitation 
2. Stabilization 
3. Coordination of rapid air or 
ground evacuation to Role 3 
facility
Role 3 (combat 
support 
hospital)
Mobile facility; highest level of 
medical and surgical care available within the military theater 
of operations
1. Mobile surgical teams 
2. Lab 
3. Radiology
1. Perform life- and limb-saving 
interventions 
2. Further stabilization 
3. Transfer to a Role 4 facility
Role 4
Fixed medical facility outside 
the continental United States 
(OCONUS)
Advanced surgical and medical 
intensive care interventions
Further stabilization prior to 
evacuation to Role 5 for definitive care 
Role 5
Fixed medical facility within 
the continental United States 
(CONUS)
1. Interdisciplinary team of 
medical and surgical specialists
2. Greater capacity for more protracted and comprehensive care
1. Provide definitive medical and 
surgical interventions 
2. Address behavioral health 
needs 
3. Comprehensive rehabilitative 
care
445
Rehabilitation and Reintegration
TABLE 31-2
COMMONLY USED REHABILITATION DEFINITIONS
Term
Definition
Activities of 
daily living 
(ADLs)
Activities required for personal care including feeding, dressing, grooming, bathing, and toileting.
Assistive technology
Any item, piece of equipment, or product, whether it is acquired commercially, modified, or customized, 
that is used to increase, maintain, or improve the functional capabilities of individuals with disabilities. 
Common examples are crutches, prosthetics, orthotics, wheelchairs, hearing aids, canes, magnifiers, 
communication boards, speech synthesizers, and talking books. 
Disability
According to the World Health Organization, the term “disability” relates more to one’s functional status 
within society than to any specific diagnosis or physical, cognitive, or emotional impairment. The ICF 
defines disability within a bio-psycho-social model in which disability arises from the interaction of 
health conditions with contextual factors—environment and personal factors. Therefore, disability is 
a complex, dynamic, multidimensional state that depends on both an individual’s capacity and their 
performance within a contextual environment. For example, an individual with an ankle fracture who 
cannot bear their weight and does not have crutches, a wheelchair, or other means of supporting independent mobility, may be more “disabled” than an individual with bilateral lower limb amputations 
who is independent in community ambulation using lower limb prosthetics.
Handicap
A disadvantage for a given individual, resulting from an impairment or a disability, that limits or prevents the fulfillment of a role that is normal for that individual.
Impairment
Problems in body function or alterations in body structure, for example, paralysis or blindness. Impairments may be static or dynamic in a progressive or diminishing manner (eg, cognitive functional impairment may improve over time after a brain injury, or may decline with various forms of dementia).
Instrumental 
activities of 
daily living 
(IADLs)
Complex tasks required for independent living in the immediate environment such as care of others 
in the household, telephone use, meal preparation, house cleaning, laundry, and in some cases use of 
public transportation.
Orthotics
Externally applied devices to restrict movement, enhance function, or protect a body part. Commonly 
referred to as braces or splints, orthotics are more accurately defined by the body parts they support (eg, 
knee orthotics, foot orthotics, spine orthotics, wrist-hand orthotics, ankle-foot orthotics).
Participation
An individual’s capacity and performance in interacting with society, whether that be within a family, 
work environment, or community. According to the ICF, participation restrictions are problems that 
may involve any area of life, for example, facing discrimination in employment, barriers to transportation, or even lack of awareness or access to programs.
Prosthetics
An artificial body part, to replace a missing extremity or other body part. Prosthetic limbs are generally 
composed of a socket (interface between the residual limb and device); joint (knee, elbow, wrist, etc); 
terminal device (hand, foot); control system; and suspension. Numerous prosthetic devices currently 
exist. Common devices include microprocessor knees, which have built-in sensors that automatically 
adjust knee flexion/extension resistance depending on the user’s speed of walking; energy-storing feet, 
which are composed of deformable materials that, when compressed through weight bearing, recoil to 
provide simulated “push-off” during walking or running; myoelectric prosthetics, which are externally 
powered, motorized (robotic-like) upper limb devices controlled by skin sensors that pick up electrical 
activity from the contraction of the residual limb muscles below them; body-powered prosthetics, which 
are upper limb prosthetics with cable systems attached to a harness around the user’s shoulders, so that 
excursion of the cable causes a terminal hand or hook device to open or close.
Rehabilitation
Programs or processes for returning an individual to health after an injury, illness, or addiction.
Rehabilitative 
medicine
Field of medicine focused on the evaluation, diagnosis, and management of individuals of all ages with a 
physical and/or cognitive impairment to maximize recovery and quality of life.
ICF: International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health 
446
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
HISTORY OF REHABILITATION IN THE MILITARY
Although the medical specialty of physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) is relatively young, 
the principles of rehabilitation date back to ancient 
Chinese medicine, when physical movement training 
called “Cong fu” was used to relieve pain, and to 5th 
century bce Greece, where physicians described an 
elaborate system of gymnastic exercises for the treatment of disease. 2 In the United States, rehabilitation 
centers grew significantly during the polio epidemic 
during the early 1900s, and gained international attention when president Franklin Delano Roosevelt, after 
suffering from lower limb paralysis as a result of polio, 
spent time learning how to walk at a unique facility in 
Warm Springs, Georgia. His personal success inspired 
him to purchase and expand the facility, which is 
believed to be the first such place in the country to 
specifically provide rehabilitative care. 3 
Military conflict has also provided a catalyst for 
the advancement for rehabilitative care. This was 
especially true during World War II, when improved 
lifesaving medical and surgical care resulted in a 
significant number of soldiers surviving wounds that 
would previously have been fatal. Their return home 
with loss of limb, paralysis, and other physical impairments necessitated more comprehensive rehabilitative 
care. In response, the US military established the US 
Army Air Forces Convalescent Training program in 
1942, which was headed by Dr Howard Rusk (considered the “father of comprehensive rehabilitative care”). 
These programs began to incorporate individualized 
physical, neuropsychological, and occupational-social 
therapies. 4 With the success of these programs and 
their ability to help severely wounded soldiers return 
to active participants in society, Congress provided 
additional funding to the Army for further training 
and research in the field of PM&R. 
Following the conflict in Vietnam, “rehabilitative” 
care was largely considered the function of the Department of Veterans Affairs; however, lessons learned 
during Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), Operation 
Enduring Freedom (OEF), and Operation New Dawn 
indicated a continued need for the Department of Defense and MHS to maintain competence and capacity 
in providing comprehensive rehabilitative care. 
RECENT CHALLENGES IN COMBAT CASUALTY REHABILTIATION
Over the past decade, significant advances have 
been made in the acute resuscitative trauma care 
of combat casualties, resulting in historically high 
survival rates. 5,6 Mortality rates have decreased from 
approximately 24% in the Vietnam conflict to less than 
20% in OIF/OEF. 7 Survival on the battlefield, however, 
is just the first step. The MHS must remain committed 
not just to helping service members “survive” after 
injury, but also to “thrive” during their recovery and 
return to active participation in society. These goals 
have been especially challenging in recent years, 
especially for combat casualties with complex blastrelated injuries, which are frequently associated with 
severe physical, emotional, and cognitive impairment. 
Injuries such as extremity trauma, limb loss, paralysis, 
traumatic brain injury (TBI), and vision and hearing 
impairment are frequently associated with blast, and 
are often complicated by complex pain, infection, and 
psychological injury, including depression, anxiety, 
and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Whether 
these injuries occur in isolation or in combination, 
they require not only specialized acute medical, surgical, and behavioral health interventions, but also a 
well-coordinated and integrated holistic rehabilitation plan. 
The distinct injury patterns associated with highenergy weaponry and blast are not commonly seen 
in the civilian medical world; therefore, MMOs must 
understand the unique challenges they present when 
caring for today’s wounded warrior. Although a discussion of the various degrees of blast injury (primary, 
secondary, tertiary, quaternary) and comprehensive 
polytrauma care is beyond the scope of this chapter, it 
is important to recognize that because of the advances 
in body armor, rapid medical support, and improved 
resuscitation techniques, service members are now 
surviving wounds that in the past would have been 
fatal. This has increased the demands for and complexity of the rehabilitative care required by this unique 
patient population. 8,9 
ELEMENTS OF MILITARY REHABILITATION
Rehabilitative efforts are largely accomplished 
through the work of an interdisciplinary team of specialists, representing a multitude of disciplines and 
employing an array of interventions, modalities, and 
assistive technologies to help maximize functional independence and successful reintegration or participation in society. Fundamental to the rehabilitative team 
are the patient and their family, who help the clinical 
447
Rehabilitation and Reintegration
team establish meaningful short-term and long-term 
goals, which are incorporated into an individualized 
treatment plan that accommodates the unique challenges and characteristics of each patient. While these 
principles are commonly practiced by physicians who 
specialize in PM&R (physiatrists), as well as other rehabilitation specialties (physical therapy, occupational 
therapy, etc), all MMOs must be familiar with these 
concepts and implement them as early and aggressively as possible when caring for combat casualties. 
It is through rehabilitation and the restoration of 
functional independence that many individuals regain 
dignity and even discover personal growth, which 
can often propel them to discover new meaning and 
purpose in their lives. Ultimately, rehabilitative efforts 
are not limited to achieving independence or providing adaptive strategies to promote daily functional 
activities; these efforts also promote the patients’ highest quality of life, successful reintegration, and active 
participation in their families and society. 
Acute Care
In addition to acute life- and limb-saving surgical 
and medical interventions, rehabilitation principles 
must also be applied as early as possible in the care 
of service members with combat injuries to ensure 
optimal outcomes. Failure to aggressively initiate 
comprehensive rehabilitative practices in the acute 
stage of caring for combat casualties leads to worsening 
secondary complications and poorer outcomes. The 
negative consequences of immobility, poor skin care, 
lack of appropriate bowel and bladder management, 
and delay in teaching independence in feeding, bathing, dressing, and communicating, may not only lead 
to multiple setbacks during the recovery process, but 
also have devastating negative effects on the physical 
and emotional well-being of service members, especially those with devastating wounds. Furthermore, 
the appropriate prescription of prosthetics (eg, artificial 
legs, arms, hands), assistive technology (eg, wheelchairs, communication tools, environmental control 
devices), and other rehabilitative interventions will 
likely help decrease pain, reduce anxiety, and promote 
earlier mobility and independence. Early rehabilitation practices typically start with patient and family 
education, as well as mitigation practices to reduce 
the risk of pressure sores, venous thromboses, joint 
contractures, osteopenia, muscle atrophy, urinary 
tract infections, bowel dysfunction, and cardiovascular 
deconditioning. 10,11 
Immobility during the acute phase of care is likely 
to lead to multiple secondary complications. Muscle 
disuse atrophy, osteopenia and osteoporosis, contractures and decubitus ulcers, significant fluid/volume 
shunting and orthostatic hypotension, decreased respiratory capacity, and increased risk for infection may 
result from prolonged bed rest and immobility. 12–14 
(A further description of some of these conditions is 
provided in Table 31-3.) Promoting early bed mobility, 
frequent skin pressure reliefs, passive and assistive 
range-of-motion exercises, and early weight-bearing 
and ambulation with or without a prosthesis, orthosis, 
or assistive device can help prevent contractures, bone 
loss, skin breakdown, and significant muscle atrophy 
or cardiovascular deconditioning. 
A comprehensive discussion of all the complications 
associated with blast trauma is beyond the scope of this 
chapter, but certain conditions, such as heterotopic ossification, venous thromboembolic events, pain, sleep 
disturbance, and behavioral health problems warrant 
recognition by all MMOs because of the frequency 
of their occurrence as well as their implications for 
successful rehabilitation and reintegration. Table 31-4 
provides a brief discussion of these unique complications and methods to mitigate and treat them.
Home Care
After discharge from the hospital, the injured service 
member will transition to outpatient care, either at home 
or utilizing base lodging associated with the nearest 
military medical treatment facility. Rehabilitation care 
continues to play a significant role during this period, 
as patients continue to recover from their wounds. Outpatient physical and occupational therapists, along with 
speech language pathologists and neuropsychologists, 
continue to challenge patients with new therapeutic 
interventions, such as targeted stretching, strengthening, and conditioning; dexterity skills training; proper 
utilization of assistive technology; and advanced cognitive and communication skills to achieve new goals 
for improved independence and higher functioning. 
Specialized providers in orthotics and prosthetics also 
refine the design and fit of these devices to maximize 
individual functional use. Throughout the outpatient 
rehabilitation process, patient and family education 
remains critically important not only to help modulate 
realistic expectations, but also to reinforce independent 
strategies and therapeutic training at home.
In-home therapeutic care (eg, nursing, therapies, 
case management), as well as home modifications, 
should also be considered for patients with persistent 
functional impairments. Architectural home modifications, such as enlarging doorways or installing ramps 
to accommodate wheelchair use, handrails to prevent 
falls, and benches in showers or elevated toilet seats, 
are some examples of common modifications. The 
448
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 31-3
COMPLICATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH IMOBILITY
Complications
Background
Assessment/Treatment
Muscle atrophy
Muscle loss, also called disuse atrophy, occurs 
at a rate of 1%–3% per day with prolonged 
immobility, and is more severe in patients 
with concurrent spinal cord injury. It affects 
all skeletal muscle, including the diaphragm, 
which may lead to hypoventilation and other 
respiratory concerns.
Early involvement by the PT/OT and rehabilitation 
team to assess. Encourage out-of-bed activity, assisted moves from bed to chair, and utilization of 
support modalities. Minimization of pain and ability 
for weight-bearing may require consultation with 
primary surgical/inpatient team.
Osteopenia/ 
osteoporosis
Decreased mechanical and muscle stress on 
bones causes a decrease in bone formation and 
an increase in bone reabsorption.
Radiographic evidence of bone loss, coupled with a 
bone mineral density scan, can support the diagnosis of osteopenia/osteoporosis. Prevention is 
preferred; early activity to prevent muscle atrophy 
can also help prevent osteopenia/osteoporosis due 
to increased mechanical stress on bones. Supplementation with bisphosphonates, oral calcium, and 
vitamin D may also help.
Contractures
Decreased movement may alter the physical 
architecture of muscles and connective tissue 
around joints, leading to arthrogenic or myogenic contractures. These significantly limit 
range of motion, function, and mobility.
Frequent range-of-motion activities and functional 
movements can prevent their formation. Treatment 
includes heat therapy, passive stretching and rangeof-motion exercise, casting or splinting of limbs, or 
in extreme cases, surgical intervention.
Fluid shifts/ 
orthostatic 
hypotension
Passive fluid shift from the lower extremities 
to the heart increases the preload on the heart, 
stimulating release of atrial natriuretic peptide 
and increased net water and salt loss. A lower 
total body volume causes a reduction in heart 
load and blood volume (causing secondary 
cardiomyocyte atrophy). Coupled with an 
autonomic dysfunction, patients may be more 
prone to orthostatic hypotension.
Monitor daily patient fluid volume intake and losses. 
Encourage out-of-bed activity and upright positioning. Use special care to prevent falls when patients 
are performing transfers and moving from a supine 
position.
Decubitus 
(pressure) 
ulcers
Excessive, unrelieved pressure causes capillary 
compression and ischemia, which promote 
skin breakdown and ulceration. This generally occurs in paralyzed, insensate, or cognitively impaired patients. Risk of ulceration 
is increased with wet or macerated skin and 
friction injuries. Bony prominences, including 
at the heels, elbow, sacrum, and occiput, are 
most at risk while patients are supine; ischial 
tuberosities are at greater risk with prolonged 
unprotected seating. 
Appropriate staging of the ulcer is important because 
it guides appropriate treatment and prevention 
procedures. The National Pressure Ulcer Advisory 
Panel, among others, provides staging and treatment guidelines. Preventing infection is important 
because pressure ulcers can be a nidus for bacterial 
colonization. Padding at risk areas is insufficient. 
Frequent turning while in bed or pressure relief 
while seating are fundamental to appropriate prevention and care. Specialized beds should be considered for all patients requiring prolonged bedrest.
PT/OT: physical therapy and occupational therapy
installment and cost of making such modifications are 
often provided with support from sources such as the 
Department of Veterans Affairs grant programs and 
nonprofit organizations (NPOs). 15 
Driving rehabilitation and motor vehicle adaptions 
should also be considered as part of the comprehensive 
rehabilitation program, because driving independence 
is also very important for the quality of life of most 
wounded warriors. For complex injury patients with 
TBI, driving independence may present significant 
challenges because it requires complex cognitive effort, 
while also performing multiple other simultaneous 
tasks. Because of the inherent risks in driving, driving simulators may be used to help assess a patient’s 
capabilities, while also providing a meaningful and 
engaging activity to supplement cognitive rehabilita449
Rehabilitation and Reintegration
tion. 16 Demonstration of successful use of a driving 
simulation platform may then lead to progression to 
on-road training with greater confidence.
Sports and Recreation
Participation in sports and physical activity has 
also been shown to significantly improve multiple 
aspects of the patient’s health; in addition to the 
physical benefits, patient outlook, social interactions, 
self-perception, and goal-oriented behaviors are also 
improved. 17 Sports and activity can also help patients 
cope with the stresses of dealing with their new disabilities. A measure of control over their own health 
and well-being is gained by actively participating in 
these activities. Additionally, these activities may 
boost self-confidence, demonstrate what the patients 
can still accomplish despite their disability, and improve overall quality of life. 18 Studies of recreational 
and leisure activities have shown specific reduction 
in symptoms of PTSD—hyperarousal, avoidance, 
and perseverance of thoughts surrounding traumatic 
events. 19 
Recreational/motivational therapists are particularly well suited to developing safe, interactive experiences for the rehabilitating patient and can provide 
an important ongoing link between hospital ward 
care and the transition home. In addition to organizing and executing group and individual sports and 
recreational activities, these therapists develop strong 
rapport with their patients and provide psychological 
support for the recovering combat casualty. 
Expressive arts can also play an important role in 
the recovery of the wounded warrior. In addition to 
the positive effects of engagement with a self-driven 
task that can provide a level of personal achievement 
and encourage creative methods of expression, the 
arts can serve to positively affect the recovery of the 
patient and serve as a contribution to their community—an effective route of reintegration. 20 There is 
some evidence that self-expression through art may 
help patients better cope with symptoms of PTSD, 
depression, and TBI. 21 
Nonprofit Organizations 
In recent years, a multitude of NPOs have mobilized 
to assist wounded warriors and their families. These 
organizations offer services ranging from exclusive 
retreats, recreational outings, and athletic events, to 
helping retrofit or build custom disability-friendly 
homes. Some NPOs purchase and customize adaptive 
vehicles, while others provide much needed assistance 
with vocational internships, peer mentoring, or coaching. Finally, some NPOs provide financial assistance 
to families for lodging, travel, or equipment. Not 
only do these organizations provide direct assistance 
to wounded veterans, but they also greatly increase 
public awareness of many of the challenges wounded 
warriors face when reintegrating back into society after injury. Their impact on the public, public officials, 
and the media all help boost community support for 
veterans, and should therefore be generally embraced 
by the rehabilitation community.
ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
The MMO is the primary medical resource for the 
unit commander. The MMO provides recommendations regarding in-garrison medical care and maintenance of a capable and healthy unit; identifies and 
provides preventative medical care for deploying 
units based on anticipated and actual medical and 
environmental threats in the deploying location; 
supports the training of assigned medical resources; 
and provides medical care to the members of the 
unit and their families. In regard to rehabilitation, 
the MMO is responsible for maximizing the functionality of the unit through effective and wellplanned medical care that accounts for effective pain 
management, functional therapies, and supportive 
methods to reintegrate the injured service member 
back into their community. Rehabilitation specialists represent a wealth of knowledge and expertise; 
therefore, MMOs must be aware of their presence 
and experience in order to maximize their mission 
success.
REHABILITATION TEAM MEMBERS AND ROLES
Rehabilitative medicine takes a team approach 
that starts during the acute phases of combat casualty 
care, as previously described. Inpatient teams most 
frequently include physiatry, physical, occupational, 
and recreational therapists; dietitians; social workers; 
rehabilitation counselors; and speech language pathologists, case managers, prosthetists, and orthotists. 
After discharge, patient care continues with outpatient 
physical and occupational therapy, driving rehabilitation, recreational/motivational therapy, and music/
art therapy. Continued medical care and follow-up, 
even after the patient has returned to duty or to their 
450
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 31-4
UNIQUE SECONDARY COMPLICATIONS FROM HIGH-ENERGY TRAUMA 
Complication
Functional Assessment
Treatment
Heterotopic 
ossification 
(HO): the 
inappropriate 
growth of bone 
within soft 
tissue 
Most often found in hip, elbow, shoulder, and 
knee. Up to 80% of traumatic amputations may 
develop HO in the residual limb. Clinical signs 
include decreased ROM of the involved limb, 
erythema, and local swelling. HO may take 
weeks to be detected by traditional radiograph1; 
appropriate diagnosis requires the exclusion 
of other conditions such as infection, deep 
venous thrombosis, or hematoma. Bone scans 
and serum alkaline phosphatase levels may aid 
diagnosis.
ROM exercises are the principal means of prevention and treatment. NSAIDs have been shown to 
reduce the incidence of HO by two- to three-fold. 2 
Another option includes the use of etidronate, 
which blocks the formation of the bone matrix. 
Surgical excision of HO is generally advised only 
for fully mature HO. 3 Early surgical excision may 
also be successful, although if performed too early, 
HO is likely to recur, especially without initiating 
prophylactic measures after excision. 4
Venous thromboembolic 
events (VTE): 
includes deep 
venous thrombosis (DVT) 
and pulmonary 
embolism (PE)
Symptoms of DVT include swelling, localized 
pain, erythema, and warmth; symptoms of 
PE include tachycardia, dyspnea, and chest 
pain. Diagnosis of VTE may be challenging for 
patients with impaired consciousness, lack of 
sensation, or paralysis, and may be aided by a 
D-dimer blood test or lung ventilation-perfusion scan; confirmatory diagnosis is achieved 
through duplex ultrasound or computed tomography scan with pulmonary angiography. 
Treatment of VTE begins with prevention. Typical 
guidelines call for pharmacological anticoagulation within 72 hours of injury; appropriate agents 
are low molecular weight heparin or adjusted dose 
unfractionated heparin. Sequential compressive 
devices or compression hose may also reduce risk. 
Surgical placement of an intravena cava filter may 
also be effective. Ultimately, early mobility and 
return to regular function are paramount to reducing the risk of VTE formation.
Behavioral/
mental health: 
includes 
posttraumatic 
stress disorder, 
depression, and 
anxiety
Symptoms may manifest as sleep disturbance, 
poor nutrition, decreased interest, and feelings 
of depression. A variety of questionnaires have 
been developed to better detect these injuries 
and diseases. 5,6
Treatment ranges from counseling to peer support 
groups, cognitive behavioral therapy, and pharmacological treatments. The behavioral therapy 
team should be involved early in the care of the 
patient to identify concerns as soon as possible.
Delirium: acute 
mental status 
change over a 
period of hours 
to a few days
Significant for trauma patients, who may resume 
consciousness in an unfamiliar hospital setting 
with little to no recall of events. Causative factors, including urinary tract infection, occult 
infection, drug interactions, inadequate pain 
control, dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, and impaired glycemic control, should be 
identified. 
Maintain a consistent treatment team, decorate 
room with familiar items, and minimize loud 
noises and bright lights. In acute cases, a 24-hour 
sitter may be needed to prevent self-harm, such as 
accidental extubation, inappropriate removal of 
IV lines, and accidental falls. Use of prophylactic 
antipsychotic medications for delirium has shown 
mixed results; these medications, along with 
physical restraints for agitated patients, should be 
used as last resort. 7
Pain
Recent reports suggest that even with newly 
published TCCC guidelines, fewer than half of 
casualties are adequately treated for their pain. 8 
Multiple sources of pain may exist for a polytrauma patient. For comatose patients, who are 
unable to express their pain verbally, providers should monitor for surrogate signs of pain, 
such as tachycardia, tachypnea, hypertension, 
and facial grimaces.
Common medications for pain management 
include NSAIDs, opioids (IV, IO, IM, and oral 
transmucosal “lollipop” forms), and ketamine. 9 
Multimodal forms of pain management include 
adjuvant pharmacological agents, such as antidepressant and anticonvulsive medications, as well 
as PCA systems and regional blocks with peripheral catheters. Alternative methods include music 
therapy, self-hypnosis, acupuncture, thermal modalities, and TENS. Emerging evidence supports 
immersion virtual reality for chronic and acute 
pain. 10,11
IM: intramuscular; IO: intraosseous; IV: intravenous; NSAID: nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PCA: patient-controlled analgesia; ROM: 
range of motion; TCCC: Tactical Combat Casualty Care; TENS: transcutaneous electrical stimulation 
(Table 31-4 continues)
451
Rehabilitation and Reintegration
(1) Perosky J, Peterson J, Eboda O, Morris M, Wang S, Levi B et al. Early detection of heterotopic ossification using near-infrared optical imaging reveals dynamic turnover and progression of mineralization following Achilles tenotomy and burn injury. J Orthop Res. 
2014;32(11):1416-1423. (2) Banovac K, Sherman A, Estores I, Banovac F. Prevention and treatment of heterotopic ossification after spinal 
cord injury. J Spinal Cord Med. 2004;27(4):376–382. (3) Potter BK, Forsberg JA, Davis TA, et al. Heterotopic ossification following combatrelated trauma. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2010;92(Suppl 2):74–89. (4) Teasell R, Mehta S, Aubut J, et al. A systematic review of the therapeutic 
interventions for heterotopic ossification after spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord. 2010;48(7):512–521. (5) McHorney CA, Ware JE Jr, Raczek AE. 
The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36): II, psychometric and clinical tests of validity in measuring physical and mental health 
constructs. Med Care. 1993;31(3):247–263. (6) US Department of Veterans Affairs. PTSD: National Center for PTSD: PTSD screening instruments. VA website. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/assessment/screens/index.asp. Accessed June 14, 2018. (7) Friese RS, Diaz-Arrastia 
R, McBride D, Frankel H, Gentilello LM. Quantity and quality of sleep in the surgical intensive care unit: are our patients sleeping? J Trauma. 
2007;63(3):1210–1214. (8) Schauer SG, Robinson JB, Mabry RL, Howard JT. Battlefield analgesia: TCCC guidelines are not being followed. 
J Spec Oper Med. 2015;15(1):85–89. (9) Kotwal R, Butler F, Edgar E, Shackelford S, Bennett D, Bailey J. Saving lives on the battlefield: a Joint 
Trauma System review of pre-hospital trauma care in combined joint operating area Afghanistan (CJOA-A) executive summary. J Spec Oper 
Med. 2013;13(1):77–85. (10) Hoffman HG, Richards TL, Coda B, A et al. Modulation of thermal pain-related brain activity with virtual reality: 
evidence from fMRI. Neuroreport. 2004;15(8):1245–1248. (11) Wiederhold B, Soomro A, Riva G, Wiederhold Md. Future directions: advances 
and implications of virtual environments designed for pain management. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2014;17(6):414–422.
 
(Table 31-4 continued)
community, is key to successful reintegration. The 
various team members who play prominent roles in 
rehabilitation are listed in Table 31-5.
After injury, regardless of the severity, the MMO 
serves as a guide to help prepare the recovering service 
member to return to duty, reintegrate back into their 
community, or both. While many team members with 
important roles contribute significantly to the service 
member’s recovery (see Table 31-5), it is the MMO who 
is responsible for coordinating the collective efforts of 
the team. 
The MMO must also balance medical care and recovery with the needs of the unit and the goals of the 
unit commanding officer (CO). If the service member 
intends to return to duty, the MMO should provide a 
reasonable timetable for their return. The MMO must 
make it clear to the CO that continued therapy and 
rehabilitative activities may be necessary even after the 
service member has returned to the unit. Continued 
pain management may also be required, and reasonable expectations of the person’s capabilities should 
be given to the CO. 
A unique consideration in military service is the 
regular participation in physical training (PT). Unlike 
most civilian occupations, all military members are 
expected to participate in PT regularly and complete 
biannual physical fitness testing to demonstrate their 
continued physical fitness. After injury, the returning 
service member should be careful in their reintroduction to PT and may require modifications to their 
training schedules. The MMO serves as a primary 
liaison between the command staff and service member, balancing the recovery and rehabilitation needs of 
the patient and encouraging a reasonable timetable for 
return to duty and personal responsibilities.
As a physician, the goal is to treat the patient in 
their entirety. In the civilian world, this often means 
the inclusion of family, educating and encouraging the 
active participation of family members in supporting 
and helping the patient adjust to their new reality as 
they heal. In the military, particularly in combat units 
that have deployed together, unit members are often 
akin to family. With patient permission (whenever 
possible), unit members should be encouraged to visit 
the patient and provide another source of support. 
Additionally, peer support groups with other injured 
service members can be useful in early resocialization 
and aid the mental aspect of the healing process.
GUIDANCE TO THE COMMANDING OFFICER
The CO, and combat/line staff in general, are tasked 
with achieving their missions as successfully as possible. While in an ideal world this includes maximal 
damage to the enemy and no loss of life or limb to their 
own troops, reality dictates that more often than not, 
one or more of their soldiers will be injured in the line 
of duty. The dangers and mishaps of life do not stop at 
the operation, however; injuries may also occur while 
in garrison and during training, and even during leave. 
It is the MMO’s duty to make the CO aware of the 
possibility of injury, recommend steps to minimize 
risk of injury and medical problems, and treat those 
that arise and return the patients to duty as soon as 
possible. Some injured service members may never be 
able to return to duty in the same way as before their 
injury; this must also be communicated to the CO. The 
MMO should be realistic in recommending times for 
patient recovery, but also keep in mind the needs of 
the unit. Even after the service member returns to the 
unit, further therapy may be needed; the MMO should 
make those expectations known to the CO as soon as 
possible, clearly outline the plans for rehabilitation 
452
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 31-5 
MEMBERS OF THE REHABILITATION TEAM
Team Member
Role
Physiatrist
Board certified in physical medicine and rehabilitation. Physiatrists provide physician leadership to 
interdisciplinary rehabilitation teams focused on functional restoration, adaptive interventions, goaldirected therapy, and improved quality of life.
Physical therapist (PT)
Credentialed providers trained in the evaluation of the patient’s physical limitations. PTs develop and 
apply therapeutic interventions to enhance mobility and function. PTs are trained in the appropriate 
use of specialized assistive technology and equipment, such as bedside commodes, crutches, canes, 
walkers, prosthetics.
Occupational 
therapist (OT)
Credentialed providers trained to assess patients for functional and cognitive deficits, particularly 
those related to performing ADLs and IADLs. OTs design upper limb prosthetics and orthotics; 
conduct driving rehabilitation, recreational therapy, and return to vocation training; also work with 
patients on problem-solving as well as fine-motor skill development.
Speech language pathologist (SLP)
Credentialed providers trained in the assessment and treatment of speech and communicative dysfunction and swallowing impairments; therapy sessions include breaking down the elements of speech 
and cognition, language processing, and listening; also assess need for special communication assistive devices. 
Certified 
prosthetist and 
orthotist (CPO)
Non-credentialed but certified specialists who fabricate and fit artificial limbs (prosthetics) or braces/
splints (orthotics). 
Assistive technology professional (ATP)
Non-credentialed providers/consultants with specialized certification in the assessment of individuals 
with disabilities to help identify, fit, train, and modify various assistive devices to support independence and function (eg, manual and motorized wheelchairs; high- or low-tech devices to support 
visual, hearing, cognitive, or communicative impairments).
Case manager 
(CM)
Credentialed nurses or social workers who coordinate comprehensive care plans for patients receiving 
services from a variety of providers. Case managers also serve as critical liaisons between the patient 
and treatment team as well as third parties (eg, insurance companies, healthcare administrators, 
equipment companies). Frequently knowledgeable about various nonprofit organizations or other 
veteran service organizations that help service members and families in need.
Rehabilitation 
psychologist
Credentialed providers who provide specialized assessments and counseling to patients and families in 
support of adjustment to hospitalization and disability. 
Neuropsychologist 
Credentialed providers trained in assessing all parameters of cognitive function (eg, attention, memory, 
problem-solving skills, language skills, executive function) as well as the links between brain injury, 
brain functioning, and behavior; especially qualified to engage patients in cognitive rehabilitation.
Vocational 
rehabilitation 
specialist
Noncredentialed providers trained in assessing and counseling patients on return to education or employment; help develop reasonable goals and trouble-shoot potential barriers in the school or workplace.
Driving rehabilitation 
specialist
May be credentialed or non-credentialed. Skilled in training and testing individuals with disabilities in 
an “on-road” training environment and assessing for appropriate adaptive vehicle mechanisms.
Recreational/
motivational 
specialist
May be credentialed or non-credentialed. Assist patients and families in applying skills learned in 
rehabilitation to activities that support personal growth and active community participation; promote 
development of self-confidence and comfort in social situations both at home and in the community, 
organize group and individual activities to practice skills and develop strategies to nurture friendships and social networks, and assist patients in finding new areas of interest as well as new ways to 
pursue old interests through adaptations.
Music/art therapist
Frequently non-credentialed but have specialized training in facilitating recovery through the application of music and art modalities. Art of all forms (visual, performance, writing, music, etc) may have a 
therapeutic effect on many neurological and psychological conditions.
(Table 31-5 continues)
453
Rehabilitation and Reintegration
Social worker
Credentialed providers who work with the patient and their family, assisting them in identifying care 
and transition needs to ensure a smooth and safe discharge; evaluate their support system and home 
needs; access community resources such as financial entitlements, home care, and transportation; 
provide information about other types of care. 
Registered 
dietitian nutritionist (RDN)
Credentialed specialists in patient diet and nutrition. Support the care team by diagnosing and prescribing an individualized diet to meet the patient’s needs based on their medical problems and goals. 
RDNs contribute a critical part in the patient’s recovery and reintegration by supporting a healthy 
lifestyle and diet.
ADLs: activities of daily living; IADLs: instrumental activities of daily living
(Table 31-5 continued)
REFERENCES
 
1. Clarke JE, Davis PR. Medical evacuation and triage of combat casualties in Helmand Province, Afghanistan: October 
2010–April 2011. Mil Med. 2012;177(11):1261–1266.
 
2. Atanelov L, Stiens SA, Young MA. History of physical medicine and rehabilitation and its ethical dimensions. AMA 
J Ethics. 2015;17:568–574.
 
3. Verville RE, Ditunno JF Jr. Franklin Delano Roosevelt, polio, and the Warm Springs experiment: its impact on physical 
medicine and rehabilitation. PM R. 2013;5(1):3–8.
 
4. Conti AA. Western medical rehabilitation through time: a historical and epistemological review. Sci World J. 2014;Jan:1–5. 
doi: 10. 1155/2014/432506.
 
5. Gerhardt RT, De Lorenzo RA, Oliver J, Holcomb JB, Pfaff JA. Out-of-hospital combat casualty care in the current war 
in Iraq. Ann Emerg Med. 2009;53(2):169–174.
 
6. Ling GS, Rhee P, Ecklund JM. Surgical innovations arising from the Iraq and Afghanistan wars. Annu Rev Med. 
2010;61(1):457–468.
 
7. Reiber GE, McFarland LV, Hubbard S, et al. Service members and veterans with major traumatic limb loss from Vietnam 
war and OIF/OEF conflicts: Survey methods, participants, and summary findings. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2010;47(4):275–297.
 
8. Scott SG, Belanger HG, Vanderploeg RD, Massengale J, Scholten J. Mechanism-of-injury approach to evaluating patients with blast-related polytrauma. J Am Osteopath Assoc. 2015;106:265–270. 
and therapy, and convey the possible limitations that 
might delay return to duty. 
The MMO should also recommend to the CO that 
other unit members be encouraged (as operational 
tempo allows) to visit with injured unit members when 
possible in order to provide support and encouragement. Keeping an injured member who is healing connected with their unit can be another way of providing 
motivation in their rehabilitative process and keep 
them feeling like a part of their squad. 
SUMMARY
Rehabilitation plays an important role in the return 
to duty and social reintegration of service members 
following injury, particularly blast-related trauma. 
While acute life- and limb-saving techniques may 
preserve the life of an individual, it is rehabilitation that preserves the function of that individual. 
When the entire rehabilitation team is utilized by 
the well-informed MMO, the chances of successful 
reintegration as a contributing member of society, 
including the possible return to duty, are significantly 
increased. MMOs can take advantage of the resources 
and structure present in the MHS to maximize the care 
rendered. They also serve as a unique and important 
liaison between the patient and their CO. MMOs 
must be clear and concise in their communication, 
promote a healthy balance between the mission and 
individual health and well-being, and always stand 
as an advocate for their patients. 
454
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
9. Dismounted Complex Blast Injury Task Force. Dismounted Complex Blast Injury. Fort Sam Houston, TX: DCBI Task 
Force; June 18, 2011. http://armymedicine.mil/Documents/DCBI-Task-Force-Report-Redacted-Final.pdf. Accessed 
September 29, 2017.
 10. Pezzin LE, Dillingham TR, MacKenzie EJ, Ephraim P, Rossbach P. Use and satisfaction with prosthetic limb devices 
and related services. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2004;85(5):723–729. 
 11. McFarland LV, Hubbard Winkler SL, Heinemann AW, Jones M, Esquenazi A. Unilateral upper-limb loss: Satisfaction 
and prosthetic-device use in veterans and servicemembers from Vietnam and OIF/OEF conflicts. J Rehabil Res Dev. 
2010;47(4):299–316.
 12. Giangregorio L, McCartney N. Bone loss and muscle atrophy in spinal cord injury: epidemiology, fracture prediction, 
and rehabilitation strategies. J Spinal Cord Med. 2006;29:489–500. 
 13. Galeiras Vázquez R, Rascado Sedes P, Mourelo Fariña M, Montoto Marqué A, Ferreiro Velasco M. Respiratory management in the patient with spinal cord injury. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:1–12. 
 14. Stekelenburg A, Gawlitta D, Bader DL, Oomens CW. Deep tissue injury: how deep is our understanding? Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2008;89(7):1410–1413.
 15. HomeAdvisor.com. Grants for home modifications: 16 resources for homeowners with disabilities. https://www.
homeadvisor.com/r/grants-for-home-modification/. Accessed June 14, 2018. 
 16. Lew HL, Rosen PN, Thomander D, Poole JH. The potential utility of driving simulators in the cognitive rehabilitation 
of combat-returnees with traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2009;24(1):51–56. 
 17. Caddick N, Smith B. The impact of sport and physical activity on the well-being of combat veterans: A systematic 
review. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2014;15(1):9–18.
 18. Laferrier J, Teodorski E, Cooper R. Investigation of the impact of sports, exercise, and recreation participation on 
psychosocial outcomes in a population of veterans with disabilities: a cross-sectional study. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 
2015;94:1026–1034.
 19. Vella EJ, Milligan B, Bennett JL. Participation in outdoor recreation program predicts improved psychosocial wellbeing among veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder: a pilot study. Mil Med. 2013;178(3):254–260. 
 20. National Initiative for Arts & Health in the Military. Arts, Health and Well-Being Across the Military Continuum. Washington, DC: Americans for the Arts; 2013. http://www.americansforthearts.org/sites/default/files/pdf/2013/by_program/
legislation_and_policy/art_and_military/ArtsHealthwellbeingWhitePaper.pdf. Accessed September 29, 2017. 
 21. Smyth J. Creative, Artistic, and Expressive Therapies for PTSD. Brookline, MA: Foundation for Art and Healing; 2012. 
