477
Tactical Medicine
Chapter 33
TACTICAL MEDICINE
LANNY F. LITTLEJOHN, MD,* and BRENDON G. DREW, DO†
INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
Tactical Environment
History of Combat Death Statistics
Wounding Patterns 
TACTICAL COMBAT CASUALTY CARE OVERVIEW
Origins
Definitive Proof of Effectiveness
Phases of Care
Contrast to Civilian Prehospital Care
HEMORRHAGE CONTROL
Tourniquets
Hemostatic Dressings
Junctional Hemorrhage
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
CHEST TRAUMA
DAMAGE CONTROL RESUSCITATION
Fresh Whole Blood
Stored Constituents of Blood
Artificial Colloids
Crystalloids
Best Strategies for Fluid Resuscitation
Emerging Adjuncts to Damage Control Resuscitation
MEDICATIONS
Tranexamic Acid
Pain Control
Antibiotics
CASE REVIEW
CONCLUSION
*Commander, Medical Corps, US Navy; Command Surgeon, Naval Special Warfare Development Group, Dam Neck, Virginia Beach, Virginia
†Commander, Medical Corps, US Navy; Chairman of Emergency Medicine, Naval Medical Center San Diego, San Diego, California
478
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION 
Medical practice in a limited-resource operational 
environment frequently differs from “standard” 
practice in a fully resourced hospital in the United 
States. Battlefield trauma care is based partly on 
standard US guidelines, such as the Advanced 
Trauma Life Support (ATLS) course, but also with an 
eye toward the unique considerations of a forward 
deployed environment. This chapter will highlight 
important operational medical skills and guidelines, 
such as those delineated in the Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) guidelines and the Prehospital 
Trauma Life Support (PHTLS) manual. 1 Thorough 
appreciation of these concepts is important not only 
for the practice of individual military medical officers 
(MMOs), but also for MMOs’ oversight and empowerment of further forward deployed providers (eg, 
corpsmen and medics) who provide care close to the 
point of injury.
BACKGROUND
Tactical Environment
Delivering medical care in the tactical environment is one of the most daunting tasks an MMO will 
be asked to prepare for and accomplish. This care 
takes place at the confluence of several challenging 
situations, including austere environments, limited 
resources (in both personnel and equipment), unusual and severe wounds, and the possible presence 
of a dangerous enemy. Exhibit 33-1 provides a more 
complete listing of conditions and concerns in this 
environment.
Considering these factors, MMOs must prepare to 
care for the severely injured while also considering 
human performance issues related to environmental 
extremes. In extreme and austere settings, the human 
body is required to operate outside its normal daily 
training pattern and adjust to the effects of high altitude, cold, heat, or other factors. Each of these conditions involve a host of problems and medical treatment 
options, including the very real concerns of infectious 
disease. Health problems caused by these threats, collectively referred to as disease and nonbattle injury 
(DNBI), have been the leading cripplers of fighting 
forces throughout history. These topics are further 
discussed in Chapter 20, Physical Fitness; Chapter 21, 
Performance Nutrition; Chapters 22 through 24, on 
environmental extremes; and Chapter 40, Preventive 
Medicine in the Deployed Environment.
Environmental elements affect not just the human 
body, but also the equipment required to care for 
it. The battlefields of Operation Enduring Freedom 
(OEF) have seen temperatures from below freezing, 
in January at Bagram Airfield in Parwan Province, to 
upwards of 137°F, in August in Helmand Province. In 
the Hindu Kush mountains, to the extreme northeast, 
operations reportedly took place as high as 15,000 to 
17,000 feet, higher than any peak in the continental 
United States. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, fine dust 
penetrates nearly any container except a tightly sealed 
zip-lock bag. Thus, any equipment used in these condiEXHIBIT 33-1
CHALLENGES OF THE TACTICAL 
ENVIRONMENT 
• Hostile fire
• Darkness
• Altitude
• Weather extremes
• Prolonged evacuation
• Limited resources
• Provider training level
• Mission completion
• Tactical considerations
• Local disease prevalence
tions can be expected to eventually fail. Blood products 
may rapidly be rendered useless when generators fail 
or blood reefers (refrigerators) simply cannot maintain 
products at 0°C to 10°C indefinitely.
To prepare for success in the tactical setting, 
mindset is a fundamental consideration for MMOs. 
In addition to normal US practice standards of care, 
MMOs must also know how to handle the unique 
wounding patterns, resource limitations, and tactical 
considerations common in this setting. There are three 
main objectives in providing care to a casualty during 
a tactical or combat mission:
 
1. Provide the best possible care for the casualty.
 
2. Minimize additional casualties.
 
3. Maximize the probability of mission success 
for the unit.
Mindset is also enhanced by remembering the 
differences between principles and preferences, as 
described in the PHTLS manual. 1(xxi) “Principles” are 
medical care goals that must be accomplished to best 
take care of the patient. “Preferences” are how these 
479
Tactical Medicine
goals are accomplished in the context of the entire 
casualty care scenario. For example, in hemorrhage 
control, the principle is to stop the bleeding. The 
preference will depend on the unique casualty care 
scenario and the tactical setting. One might choose to 
immediately place a tourniquet while under effective 
hostile fire, even if there is only moderate bleeding, 
whereas in a safer environment, a provider might apply a pressure dressing as the initial action.
To deliver the very best care in challenging environments, MMOs must have a strong font of knowledge and a wider breadth of skills than their civilian 
counterparts. A provider should have multiple ways 
of accomplishing tasks such as securing an endotracheal tube. MMOs must also understand the tactics, 
techniques, and procedures unique to their unit; be 
thoroughly versed in the unit mission; and develop a 
collegial working relationship both with the command 
and with the medics or corpsmen working under their 
supervision. The joint operational environment US 
forces commonly work in requires an understanding of 
all other medical capabilities—those in other US units, 
interagency organizations, and coalition partners. Decisions must be made about which medical capability 
will be placed where during unit operations. Casualty 
scenarios almost always involve both medical and 
tactical problems. Thus, the MMO must communicate 
TCCC principles to unit leaders throughout their assignment to the unit so that appropriate management 
and evacuation plans can be developed in the context 
of the overall tactical situation. 
Before discussing specific injuries in the combat 
environment, some further broad principles must 
be covered. Predeployment training for the different services continues to differ significantly, even for 
similar missions. It is incumbent on providers to pay 
close attention in training and to seek further training 
early once they are informed of a pending deployment. 
On their initial deployment, MMOs are rarely fully 
prepared to experience and manage combat trauma; 
thus, exposure to actual trauma, as well as contact 
with providers who recently returned from combat 
operations, is essential. Examples of in-depth trauma 
training for military providers can be found at the 
Navy Trauma Training Center at Los Angeles County/
University of Southern California Medical Center, 
the Air Force Center for Sustainment of Trauma and 
Readiness Skills program at the University of Cincinnati Medical Center, and the Army Trauma Training 
Center at the University of Miami/Jackson Memorial 
Hospital Ryder Trauma Center. In addition to these 
programs, which leverage civilian-military partnerships, each service sponsors numerous local and unit 
training opportunities.
MMOs should study their unit’s various missions 
in depth prior to deployment, because not all tactical 
medicine will occur on combat missions. For example, 
Exhibit 33-2 lists the numerous possible missions of 
a Marine expeditionary unit deployment. Lastly, the 
MMO should thoroughly study the environment of 
care and resources available in the specific area of 
operations. Limited treatment and rapid evacuation 
to a higher level of care may quite possibly be the best 
option for a given patient and tactical scenario.
History of Combat Death Statistics
To understand the basic statistics involved in 
describing combat casualties, the terms “killed in 
action” (KIA), “died of wounds” (DOW), and “case 
fatality rate” (CFR) must be defined. Up to 90% of all 
casualties who do not survive die on the battlefield 
before arriving at a dedicated field hospital. These 
casualties are described as KIA. KIA has classically 
served as an indicator of weapon lethality and the 
utility of protective measures, both of which have 
increased steadily over time. If a casualty survives 
to be admitted to a field hospital, but then later dies 
from injury, they are described as DOW. DOW has 
been seen as an indicator of the effectiveness of combat casualty care. A combination of KIA and DOW is 
the CFR, which is an indicator of the overall lethality 
of the battlefield. 
Organized prehospital trauma care had its birth on 
the 19th century battlefields of the Napoleonic wars. 
With each major conflict since, lessons learned were 
EXHIBIT 33-2
POSSIBLE MISSION PROFILES FOR A 
MARINE EXPEDITIONARY UNIT 
 
• Amphibious assault 
 
• Security, stability, transition, and reconstruction operations 
 
• Support theater security cooperation activities 
 
• Humanitarian assistance 
 
• Noncombatant evacuation operations 
 
• Tactical recovery of aircraft, equipment, personnel 
 
• Airfield operations from expeditionary sea 
or shore-based sites 
 
• Airfield or port seizure operations 
 
• Joint and combined operations 
 
• Maritime contingency operations 
 
• Visit, board, search, and seizure operations 
480
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
promulgated to the civilian sector; conversely, in times 
of peace, civilian medical advances were transitioned 
to the military medical community. These exchanges 
have not always been seamless, but the civilian community has often profited significantly from military 
medicine. The following examples of advances in 
military medicine led to major improvements in civilian medicine.
During the Civil War, Jonathan Letterman established an ambulance corps under the command of a 
medical officer, and the concept of a field hospital 
emerged, as well as the correlation of treatment time 
and survival rates. The prolonged trench warfare of 
World War I led to a significant rise in DNBI cases 
of trench foot, frostbite, and hypothermia. Blood 
products, first used on the battlefield at the close 
of World War I, were further developed during the 
interwar years. During World War II, blood products were further improved, as were methods of 
pain control in combat casualty care. A formalized 
triage system was utilized to prioritize casualty 
evacuation. Antibiotics were developed. 2 Brian J. 
Ford, a British scientist, noted, “If any good can 
be said to become of war, then the Second World 
War must go on record as assisting and accelerating one of the greatest blessings that the twentieth 
century has conferred on man—the huge advances 
of medical knowledge and surgical techniques. War, 
by producing so many and such appalling casualties, and by creating such widespread conditions in 
which disease can flourish, confronted the medical 
profession with an enormous challenge, and the 
doctors of the world rose to the challenge of the last 
war magnificently.”3
Moving surgical care further forward was the 
hallmark of the Korean War, with the development 
of mobile Army surgical hospital (MASH) units and 
helicopter casualty evacuation. 4 Helicopters were 
used extensively during the Vietnam conflict, but 
despite this rapid mode of casualty movement, the 
CFR remained essentially unchanged from World War 
II, due to a lack of significant changes in the training 
and equipment supplied to combatants and medics 
who provided initial care. Further, poorly designed 
and translated animal studies on blood volume replacement led to the recommendation to enhance lost 
circulating blood volume with crystalloid (replacing 
blood lost by a factor of three). In a 1970 cohort of 
2,600 casualties, 7. 9% of injuries resulted from isolated 
extremity wounds that would have been amenable 
to a simple tourniquet, and were likely worsened by 
crystalloid resuscitation. 5 
The CFR did not decrease significantly until OEF 
and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF)—from 16. 5% in 
Vietnam to 8. 8% today. 6 The KIA and DOW rates 
were similar in World War II and Vietnam: 88% and 
12%, respectively. Considering OEF and OIF together, 
the KIA rate was 77% and the DOW was 23%. This 
indicates that casualties are surviving longer due to 
improved initial care and resuscitation (despite the 
increased lethality of weapons), and more severely 
injured casualties are making it to the combat support 
hospital before succumbing to their injuries. 7
A major reason for this improvement was the 
change in tourniquet use. Early in OEF and OIF, 
there was still an inordinate amount of potentially 
preventable deaths. Holcomb et al8 found that 25% of 
casualties in their series would have survived with the 
simple application of a tourniquet. Kelly et al9 found 
a 7. 8% rate of potentially preventable deaths resulting from failure to use a tourniquet when indicated. 
In the latest comprehensive study of deaths on the 
battlefield, by Eastridge et al,10 there were 23. 3 deaths 
per year from isolated extremity hemorrhage in the 
“pre-tourniquet” years, dropping dramatically to 3. 5 
deaths per year from this mechanism after tourniquets 
had been widely distributed on the battlefield and 
all combatants had been trained and encouraged in 
their use. 
Wounding Patterns
For the past decade, the predominant type of injury 
on the battlefield has been penetrating wounds (75%). 
Survivability has been upwards of 90%; whereas in 
Vietnam it was 84%, and in World War II, 80%. 7 This 
increase is due to better trained tactical prehospital 
providers, better protective equipment, faster evacuation times, and improved far-forward care. 
Better personal protective equipment such as modern body armor has changed the wounding patterns 
in the current conflicts in comparison to World War 
II, Korea, and Vietnam (Table 33-1). There are now 
fewer thoracic injuries and more head, neck, and 
extremity trauma. Most combat-related injuries are 
now from explosions, followed by gunshot wounds. 11 
The extremities have the highest rate of injury, followed by the abdomen, face, and head. 12 The most 
common type of battlefield injury currently is the 
multiple fragment wound to multiple anatomic sites. 
Throughout all warfare over the past 2 centuries, the 
most common site of injury has been the extremity. 
Because the leading cause of preventable combat death 
is exsanguination from compressible hemorrhage, it is 
important to build a combat casualty care paradigm 
around hemorrhage control, moved as far forward 
as possible—even to the individual combatant and 
first responder.
481
Tactical Medicine
TABLE 33-1
WOUNDING PATTERNS IN MAJOR US CONFLICTS
Conflict
Type of Warfare
Top Mechanisms (%)
Distribution, Top Sites (%)
Civil War
Napoleonic (set piece)
GSW, explosions
Data not found
WWI
Trench (defensive)
Explosions 
Extremity (70) 
Head/neck (17)
Other (4)
WWII
Mechanized land, amphibious assault
Mortar (39) 
Bullet (33) 
Grenade (12)
Extremity (75) 
Thorax (8) 
Other (9)
Korea
Amphibious, mechanized
Data not found
Extremity (67) 
Head/neck (17) 
Thorax (7) 
Abdomen (7)
Vietnam
Jungle warfare, COIN
Bullet (30) 
Mortar (19) 
IED (17)
Extremity (74) 
Head/neck (14) 
Thorax (7)
OIF/OEF
COIN, asymmetric warfare
IED (64) 
Bullet (26) 
Mortar (3)
Extremity (55) 
Head/neck (27)
Abdomen (6)
COIN: counterinsurgency
GSW: gunshot wound
IED: improvised explosive device
OIF/OEF: Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation Enduring Freedom
WW: World War 
TACTICAL COMBAT CASUALTY CARE OVERVIEW
Although the “golden hour” concept has been 
controversial when studying the injured as a population,13,14 what is unquestioned is that the lives of the 
injured overwhelmingly lie in the hands of those who 
place the first dressing. The right treatment, in the right 
tactical situation, and at the right time requires the focus 
of research, training, and education to be on the role 
and capabilities of the forward prehospital provider.
For decades, prehospital (and hospital) providers 
had been trained to care for combat casualties with 
principles based on civilian trauma care. However, 
combat trauma and civilian-based trauma differ in 
terms of wounds, resources, and environmental conditions. Toward the end of the 20th century, it was realized that the principles of ATLS, though sound within 
a civilian framework, were not just deleteriously affecting the outcome of the combat casualty, but were 
also dangerous for those delivering care at the point of 
injury. For example, treating a gunshot wound to the 
face in a tactical situation at night, a provider could 
blindly focus on the ATLS “A” for airway, leading to 
violation of tactical lighting principles and exposure 
to enemy fire. Airway maneuvers could wait until the 
patient had been moved to an area of cover, and maneuvers that do not require any bright “white” light 
could be performed, protecting both the patient and 
provider. As is stated throughout the TCCC curriculum: good medicine can be bad tactics, and bad tactics 
can get others killed and/or cause the mission to fail. 
Origins 
TCCC was an initiative that began at the Naval 
Special Warfare Command in 1993, resulting in the 
publication of the first introductory paper on the concept in 1996. 15 Although this article provided a solid 
foundation, the sheer volume of rapidly advancing 
research in the field of combat trauma has required the 
Committee on TCCC (CoTCCC) to meet regularly to 
review new research, direct findings from the battlefield, and recommendations from leaders in the field of 
combat trauma. The CoTCCC is composed of trauma 
surgeons, emergency physicians, operational unit 
physicians, combat medics, corpsmen, and pararescue 
specialists, spanning the entire realm of providers who 
might be called on to treat the injured.
482
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
The CoTCCC was initially independent, then became part of the Defense Health Board before being 
integrated into the Joint Trauma System. Recommendations and curriculum changes are published in the 
Journal of Special Operations Medicine and in the PHTLS 
manual. TCCC is the only set of battlefield trauma 
guidelines to receive a triple endorsement by the 
American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma, 
the National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians, and the Department of Defense (DoD). The 
guidelines can be viewed open source at http://www.
naemt.org/education/TCCC/guidelines_curriculum. 
Recently, the Committee on En Route Casualty Care 
and the Committee on Surgical Combat Critical Care 
were established by the Joint Trauma System at the 
Army Institute of Surgical Research in San Antonio, 
Texas, to broaden standardized treatment guidelines 
for combat trauma patients.
As recent lessons learned from war became integrated into civilian trauma care in the United States, 
a synergistic and reciprocal relationship developed 
between TCCC and Tactical Emergency Medicine 
Support (TEMS) protocols, which are practiced by 
law enforcement tactical teams, the FBI, and other 
state and federal agencies. Although the relationship 
between TCCC and TEMS is quite strong and direct, 
the relationship between the principles of TCCC and 
ATLS is less so.
Definitive Proof of Effectiveness
In the late 1990s, the 75th Ranger Regiment was 
directed by its commanding officer (General Stanley 
McChrystal) to aggressively adopt TCCC. McChrystal 
directed this elite combat unit to focus on four items 
in training: (1) marksmanship, (2) physical training, 
(3) small unit tactics, and (4) medical training (TCCC). 
Thus, TCCC was integrated into programs of instruction, training exercises, and planning at all levels. This 
integration, along with tactical leader assumption 
of responsibility for the casualty response system, 
continues to be an entirely different method from 
the training and casualty response approach taken 
by other ground combat units within the DoD—a 
paradigm that must change for battlefield trauma 
care to be improved. Results of a comprehensive 
analysis showed that on more than 8,000 missions 
over a 10-year period, the Rangers lost only 28 men, 
despite being one of the most heavily engaged units in 
combat operations. None of these deaths were from a 
preventable cause. 16 Recognizing its effectiveness, the 
Defense Health Board now recommends that TCCC 
training be provided in a tiered fashion to all personnel operating in the battle space. 17 
Phases of Care
TCCC is divided into three phases of care, with the 
priorities of care shifting depending on the phase. In 
care under fire (CUF), a provider is required to take 
actions in caring for a casualty when under “effective” 
hostile fire. While this definition is vague, in CUF fire 
is being directed toward the provider or casualty. The 
priority is to ensure that the uninjured provider stays 
reasonably safe so that medical care can be delivered 
when the situation allows (a dead or injured medical 
provider cannot provide effective care). The casualty 
should be retrieved only when suppressive fire can be 
effectively provided. The only two pieces of “medical” gear utilized at this time are a weapon (the best 
medicine on the battlefield is fire superiority) and 
a tourniquet (to stop life-threatening hemorrhage). 
Tourniquets are applied immediately by the casualty 
(self-aid) or by someone else once the casualty has been 
moved to cover (buddy aid or medical care).
Tactical field care (TFC) occurs once effective hostile 
fire is no longer present. There still may be a threat of 
hostile fire, but the risk is lower (if more enemy move 
into the area, the threat may increase and providers 
may find they are back in CUF). TFC is conducted in 
the forward environment, so gear remains limited to 
what the medic or far-forward medical officer carries 
on their person. This equipment will vary depending 
on the operation and available resources. If vehicles 
are in use, there may be extra equipment carried in a 
vehicle kit. If infiltration is by airborne operations or 
forced march, the equipment will be limited to a small 
medical pack.
The final phase of TCCC is tactical evacuation 
(TACEVAC). This phase may provide the first opportunity to begin resuscitation with blood products. 
There should be additional monitoring equipment 
available, as well as the presence of ventilators and 
other more advanced equipment. Older terms for 
evacuation are casualty evacuation (CASEVAC) and 
medical evacuation (MEDEVAC); CASEVAC usually 
indicates a “vehicle of opportunity” where dedicated 
medical care is not present, and MEDEVAC usually 
indicates the presence of a dedicated medical provider. 
In reality, these terms overlap considerably and have 
led to confusion, so TCCC refers to any evacuation as 
simply TACEVAC.
Contrast to Civilian Prehospital Care
The approach to trauma care in combat is different 
than the approach of ATLS in a civilian environment. 
The ATLS mnemonic “ABCDE” (Airway, Breathing, 
Circulation, Disability, Exposure) is not used in a 
483
Tactical Medicine
tactical environment; instead, combat trauma is prioritized according to the “MARCH” paradigm: Massive hemorrhage, Airway, Respirations, Circulation, 
Hypothermia.
Control of bleeding takes precedence over all other 
efforts. Once a casualty loses blood, there may be a 
significant delay before volume can be replaced. Tourniquets should be used readily and early, with frequent 
reassessments for their need. Attention to the airway 
and cervical spine are delayed until the TFC phase, 
when the casualty and rescuer are both removed 
from hostile fire. Airway maneuvers require too much 
risk to the provider in terms of time and exposure in 
CUF. Because the majority of injuries are penetrating, 
the likelihood of an unstable cervical spine fracture is 
negligible during combat operations, unless there is 
significant blunt force trauma (as in a large explosive 
device blast or vehicular crash).
Casualties with loss of consciousness who are 
spontaneously breathing are given a nasopharyngeal 
airway and placed in the recovery position (on their 
side with slight flexion). To minimize the risk of hypothermia, clothing is removed only where necessary to 
treat injuries. Intravenous (IV) access is not performed 
for casualties with a strong radial pulse and normal 
mentation in the setting of mild to moderate wounds. 
Oral rehydration is adequate in these casualties.
Another concept included in TCCC is the futility 
of basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for any 
casualty without signs of life. The pathophysiology of 
circulatory arrest in a trauma scenario is completely 
different than in a medical scenario. Closed-chest CPR 
requires that the heart have adequate volume to pump. 
In trauma, an arrest is usually from causes that do not 
respond to closed chest compressions: hypovolemia 
due to hemorrhage results in inadequate volume; tension pneumothorax (TPTX) prevents venous return to 
the heart, leading to inadequate preload for CPR to be 
effective; and cardiac tamponade prevents the atria 
and ventricles from filling. Specific TCCC principles 
and techniques, shaped by the combat trauma setting, 
are discussed in detail below.
HEMORRHAGE CONTROL
Tourniquets
Tourniquets should be applied early and liberally if 
there is any question of exsanguinating hemorrhage. 
Despite the obvious effectiveness of tourniquets at 
saving lives due to exsanguination from extremity 
injuries, the tourniquet has fallen in and out of favor 
periodically over centuries. 18–20 Concerns historically 
related to tourniquet application include loss of limb, 
ischemic pressure damage, rhabdomyolysis, nerve or 
vascular damage, and reperfusion syndrome. However, with updated technology and proper training, 
modern tourniquets applied properly do not result in 
these complications. Documented complications from 
currently approved tourniquets are primarily caused 
by improper application. Despite reported rates of 
“non-indicated” tourniquets ranging from 47%21 to 
74%,22 research has shown that morbidity from liberal 
tourniquet use in the global war on terror has been 
minimal, and no permanent complications have been 
documented as a result of proper tourniquet application and management. 23–25 While a complete discussion 
of the history of tourniquet use is beyond the scope 
of this chapter, no controversy currently exists as to 
the effectiveness of properly applied tourniquets at 
saving lives.
Numerous articles have been published on the 
evolution of the modern tourniquet. 26–28 The push for 
an effective battlefield tourniquet was a direct result 
of continued cases of death from extremity exsanguination early in OIF/OEF. Several factors were taken 
into consideration, including ease of self-application; 
durability; logistics (cost, weight, and volume); and 
width. Wider tourniquets provide arterial occlusion at 
lower pressures and therefore lower the risk of direct 
pressure damage to tissue. 
Of the CoTCCC-approved tourniquets, the most important factor in selecting which to carry is familiarity. 
More rapid application is associated with decreased 
blood loss. Proper training leads to familiarity and 
more rapid application (both in the decision to apply and in actual device employment). In a study of 
Canadian military personnel, the primary tourniquet 
fielded over several years was applied the fastest by 
trained medics. 29 
Proper application of a tourniquet includes stopping 
arterial flow distal to the tourniquet; venous tourniquets represent a significant concern. A tourniquet 
may be applied with enough force to initially stop 
visual bleeding, but it may not stop all arterial flow 
to the extremity. This eventually leads to paradoxical bleeding as venous return is impeded and tissues 
become engorged. 30 The risk of venous tourniquets 
is high in the CUF phase. With lifesaving maneuvers 
taking precedence over diagnostic maneuvers in some 
tactical situations, the patient’s uniform is not likely 
to be removed (so there is incomplete evaluation of 
the wound site) and boots may remain on their feet 
(so absence of distal pulse is not confirmed). Rates 
of venous tourniquet placement in the prehospital 
484
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
setting as high as 83% have been documented. Given 
the potential complications associated with a venous 
tourniquet, proper application is extremely important.
Properly applied tourniquets cause ischemia that 
starts at the area of application and extends distally. 
Factors such as duration of application, temperature, 
and location affect the extent of tissue injury. Despite 
the general consensus that tourniquets applied for less 
than 2 hours are safe,31,32 there is no consensus on the 
upper limit of “safe” tourniquet use. A recent extensive 
review published in the orthopedic surgery literature 
was unable to definitively answer this question. 33 
Further complicating the discussion is a documented 
case of an upper extremity tourniquet left in place for 
16 hours with successful return of function to the injured limb. Factors such as distal placement and cold 
ambient temperatures likely contributed to the good 
outcome in this case. 34 
With emphasis on early placement of tourniquets 
in the CUF phase of TCCC, any applied tourniquet 
must be repeatedly reevaluated for proper placement 
(absence of arterial pulse) and the need for continued 
use. The careful and deliberate process of evaluating 
tourniquets for removal is called conversion. The 
potential for significant blood loss and hemodynamic 
decompensation with the haphazard removal of 
tourniquets has been documented back to World 
War II. 35 Contraindications to attempted conversion 
include amputations, active shock, and an inability to 
continuously monitor the extremity. Tourniquets that 
have been in place for more than 6 hours should not 
be removed until the patient has reached a definitive 
care setting with laboratory and close monitoring capabilities. In 2015, the TCCC guidelines were updated 
to ensure that all tourniquets are reevaluated at each 
level of care and no more than 2 hours after initial 
placement. A step-by-step process for conversion was 
first published in 200527 and updated in 2015. 31
Hemostatic Dressings
The last decade has witnessed a surge of products 
designed to manage severe bleeding in compressible 
areas not amenable to tourniquet application, or for 
use when a tourniquet might be deemed inappropriate. Collectively, these products are termed hemostatic 
dressings or hemostatic agents. However, despite extensive research, no single hemostatic dressing has 
emerged as superior. The ideal properties of current 
TCCC-recommended hemostatic dressings are listed 
in Table 33-2. 36
 In 2003, the first hemostatic agent selected by the 
CoTCCC was the HemCon (Medline, Northfield, IL) 
bandage; this was followed by QuikClot (Z-Medica, 
Wallingford, CT) granules. 37 After continued research 
into more efficacious products, in 2008 Combat Gauze 
(Z-Medica) was selected by the CoTCCC as the firstline hemostatic dressing. Today there are three products that meet the CoTCCC requirements for effective 
hemostatic dressings: HemCon ChitoGauze, QuickClot Combat Gauze, and Celox Gauze (MedTrade 
Products, Crewe, UK).
There are three main mechanisms of action for the 
hemostatic properties of these products. Dressings 
that concentrate clotting factors work through the 
rapid absorption of the water content of blood, leaving remaining coagulation proteins and platelets at 
the site of the wound. The archetype product with 
this mechanism of action was the original QuikClot 
granular formulation, adopted by the US Navy and the 
Marine Corps as their initial hemostatic agent of choice. 
QuikClot contained a zeolite mineral that absorbed 
water; however, its loose granules and an exothermic 
reaction caused safety concerns. 38
Mucoadhesive agents (chitosans) react with blood 
and wounded tissue to form a glue-like substance that 
effectively seals or tamponades the wound. The hemostatic properties of chitosan appear to be by direct electrostatic interaction between negatively charged cell 
membranes of the erythrocytes and positively charged 
chitosan. These agents display strong adherence to tissues and physically seal bleeding wounds. 39 The first 
TABLE 33-2
PROPERTIES OF TCCC-RECOMMENDED 
HEMOSTATIC DRESSINGS
Criteria
Combat 
Gauze*
Celox 
Gauze†
HemCon 
Chitogauze‡
Stops arterial bleeding after 2–3 min of 
compression
Yes
Yes
Yes
Low side effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Easy to use
Yes
Yes
Yes
Light weight
Yes
Yes
Yes
Tolerates environmental extremes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Long shelf life
3 years
4 years
3 years
FDA approved
Yes
Yes
Yes
Effective in 
coagulopathy
No
Yes
Yes
*Z-Medica, Wallingford, CT
†MedTrade Products, Crewe, UK
‡Medline, Northfield, IL
FDA: Food and Drug Administration
485
Tactical Medicine
mucoadhesive product approved was the HemCon 
bandage, adopted by the US Army as its first-line hemostatic agent. However, because the mucoadhesive 
barrier is a physical phenomenon, there is a theoretical 
danger of re-bleeding if an initially hypotensive patient 
is resuscitated to a normal blood pressure. 40
Procoagulants act by either activating the coagulation cascade or by supplying clotting factors at the 
site of injury. Combat Gauze is the only current 
FDA-approved product in this category. It is a gauze 
impregnated with kaolin, which activates the intrinsic 
pathway of coagulation. 41 Due to the efficacy concerns 
with HemCon and the safety concerns with the original 
granular QuikClot, the CoTCCC recommended Combat Gauze as the only hemostatic dressing that passed 
both efficacy and safety testing. Later, both Celox 
Gauze and ChitoGauze (two mucoadhesive products) 
were included, after well-designed studies showed 
their efficacy to be similar to Combat Gauze. 42,43
Successful application of these agents requires that 
a wound be firmly packed so there is a direct interface 
between the hemostatic gauze and the injured tissue. 
After application, pressure is maintained by the tightly 
packed wound, supplemented with an adequate pressure dressing. For most hemostatic dressings, pressure 
is held manually after wound packing for a minimum 
of 2 minutes before pressure dressing application. In 
fact, in some wounds the method of packing appears 
to be more important than the hemostatic dressing 
utilized. 44 Additional methods to provide pressure 
similar to a pressure dressing are to use a stapler to 
approximate the wound edges over the dressing, apply 
a non-vented chest seal over the wound, or place a new 
device on the wound called the iTClamp (Innovative 
Trauma Care, Edmonton, Canada).
Junctional Hemorrhage
A recent review of battlefield casualties over a 10year period found that 90. 9% of deaths were due to 
hemorrhage. Sites of lethal hemorrhage were truncal 
(67. 3%), junctional (19. 2%), and peripheral extremity 
(13. 5%). 10 Junctional regions are those areas of the body 
where the extremities join the torso, such as the groin 
or axilla, and are too proximal for extremity tourniquet 
application. High junctional wounds are often not 
amenable to hemostatic dressings and are therefore 
termed noncompressible. If one of the new junctional 
tourniquet devices had been applied to the casualties 
with junctional hemorrhage, it is postulated that up to 
three US casualties per month would have been saved 
over the last decade of combat operations. 45 
Three junctional devices are currently approved by 
the FDA: the SAM Junctional Tourniquet (SJT; SAM 
Medical Products, Portland, OR); the Combat Ready 
Clamp (CRoC; Combat Medical Systems, Fayetteville, 
NC); and the Junctional Emergency Treatment Tool 
(JETT; North American Rescue, Greer, SC). The unilateral CRoC device has been evaluated on humans 
as well as in swine, manikin, and cadaver models. Assembly time to final application was reported to range 
between 55 and 90 seconds, depending on the surface 
condition and casualty model used. 46 In the swine 
model, the device was 100% successful in controlling 
bleeding just superior to the inguinal ligament using 
four to nine turns of the windlass. 47 Both the JETT and 
SJT treat combined pelvic and lower extremity injuries 
by incorporating a pelvic binder with bilateral hemorrhage control devices at the femoral arteries just distal 
to the inguinal ligament. In a fresh human cadaver 
model designed to recreate arterial flow at normal 
physiologic blood pressures, blood flow was halted 
in the femoral arteries with four to eight complete 
turns of the windlass handle, achieving success in 
controlling hemorrhage in all cases. Bilateral control of 
hemorrhage was achieved in 10 to 17 seconds after application, whereas the CRoC took 68 seconds to achieve 
bilateral control. 48 Improvised control of hemorrhage 
at junctional sites can also be achieved by securing 
either a rigid water bottle or a rolled SAM splint over 
the inguinal area and securing tightly with a regular 
(extremity) tourniquet.
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
Airway problems in the tactical setting may seem 
daunting, but treatment is usually not difficult with 
appropriate predeployment training and a planned 
approach. Airway management begins during the 
TFC phase of TCCC. Control of significant external 
hemorrhage remains the first priority. 
Most casualties who need airway management are 
simply unconscious or have altered mental status; the 
most likely source of airway compromise is occlusion 
by the tongue. This can be addressed in several ways. 
Immediate placement of the casualty in the recovery 
position is the favored initial maneuver. After this has 
been done, a nasopharyngeal airway is recommended 
to allow for a patent airway past the tongue and soft 
tissues of the oropharynx. Casualties may go in and 
out of consciousness; therefore, oropharyngeal airways 
should be avoided because they may stimulate the gag 
reflex and vomiting.
Traumatic airway obstruction, commonly related 
to facial or neck trauma, may also occur. These inju486
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
ries have accounted for nearly 2% of combat-related 
deaths in OIF and OEF. 49 Airway obstruction of this 
nature ranks as the third leading cause of preventable combat death. Depending on the training and 
skill of the operator, endotracheal intubation in the 
tactical setting may be difficult, so a surgical airway 
(cricothyroidotomy) is frequently the airway of choice. 
However, recent evidence suggests that the failure rate 
of cricothyroidotomy can be as high as 33% when conducted by prehospital providers. 50 Using the Cric-Key 
technique is currently the preferred method. 51
While researchers look for improved methods of 
surgical airway management, MMOs should be prepared for other options such as supraglottic airways. 
These are more beneficial for the patient who may have 
airway compromise due to sedation or pain control. 
Because most airway compromise is from tongue occlusion or facial trauma, and most of these patients 
have an airway occlusion but are otherwise spontaneously breathing, it is usually not necessary to place 
the casualty on a ventilator or use a bag valve mask. 
However, if providers have the skills for advanced 
airway management, they should also be able to conduct positive pressure ventilation with these devices. 
Due to equipment failure and battery life problems, 
the presence of a bag valve mask is essential.
CHEST TRAUMA
According to the Joint Theater Trauma Registry, 
thoracic trauma has been the cause of lethal injury 
in 5% to 7% of all deaths in OEF and OIF. 52,53 TPTX, 
which is lethal yet readily preventable, ranks as the 
second leading cause of preventable combat death. 
Thus, the evaluation of the chest, and the immediate treatment of life-threatening injuries that compromise breathing, ranks only behind controlling 
massive hemorrhage in preventing death in combat 
casualties. Potentially life-threatening wounds also 
include closed pneumothorax and open pneumothorax (a sucking chest wound that can significantly 
compromise breathing efforts). The most serious 
condition, TPTX, can result in rapid collapse of respiratory and cardiovascular function. This occurs 
as air progressively enters the intrapleural space 
over time from either the external environment (via 
a chest wound with a ball-valve effect) or from internal bronchopulmonary disruption. The progressive 
“tension” of air pressure decreases venous return to 
the heart. This decreases preload, places pressure 
on the heart chambers that further decreases filling, 
and collapses the ipsilateral lung, which impedes 
pulmonary oxygen exchange. Clinical hallmarks are 
symptoms of progressive dyspnea and altered mental status. Signs are hypotension, hypoxia, cyanosis, 
jugular venous distension, decreased breath sounds, 
and hyperresonance to percussion on the injured 
side of the chest. 
Closed pneumothoraces are rare in the combat 
setting but can occur as a result of blunt trauma. This 
condition is rarely diagnosed in the prehospital setting and should not be expected to result in a TPTX 
unless the patient is placed under positive pressure 
ventilation. If penetrating chest trauma has occurred 
and there is any significant hemodynamic instability 
or respiratory distress, the presence of a TPTX should 
be assumed. Performing a needle thoracentesis has 
the potential to save a life in this situation, and even 
if TPTX physiology is not present, a pneumothorax is 
likely. The downside of needle thoracentesis is small 
compared to the potential life saved. 
The standard first-line intervention for a suspected 
TPTX in the prehospital setting is the placement of a 
needle thoracostomy (NT) with a 14-gauge, 3. 25-inch 
(8. 25-cm) angiocatheter in the thorax to relieve pressure. However, concerns about this technique have 
arisen due to the technical aspects of needle placement. 
The classic teaching is to perform an NT at the second 
intercostal space in the midclavicular line, and that an 
audible and palpable rush of air should be heard and 
felt if any significant pressure is relieved. However, 
recent studies have challenged the effectiveness of this 
approach. Some of the disadvantages cited have been 
inadequate catheter length, kinking of the catheter, and 
occlusion by clots. 54,55 Autopsy and computed tomography chest studies have demonstrated a 50% failure 
rate for standard length angiocatheters in the second 
intercostal space due to chest thickness. Other studies 
indicate that placement of the chest tube at the fourth 
intercostal space, anterior axillary line, has a higher 
success rate. 56 This location can be readily accessed 
without the removal of body armor, an advantage in 
certain combat settings. 
When NT was isolated and standardized in a porcine model of TPTX, the failure rate of NT compared 
to tube thoracostomy (TT) was 58% (TT was successful in 100%). 57 It must be noted that an earlier paper 
by Holcomb et al showed a success rate for NT of 
100%. 58 Careful analysis of the model showed that 
the definition of TPTX was a fall in cardiac output of 
20% in the Holcomb paper, which was much milder 
than the definition in the former study, where cardiovascular collapse was precipitated (fall in systolic 
blood pressure [SBP] >50% or pulseless electrical 
activity). The conclusion could be made that NT is 
487
Tactical Medicine
effective at relieving less severe compromise from 
tension physiology, but that finger thoracostomy or 
TT is likely required in the casualty who is rapidly 
decompensating. 
The experience of the Israeli Defense Forces is 
instructive in this regard. Although their transport 
times are much shorter than the US experience in 
OEF and OIF, providers treated 111 casualties with 
NT over a 5-year period, and reported a failure rate 
of treatment for presumed TPTX with NT of 32%. All 
the failures required a TT in the field. 59 In the austere 
setting, it is likely that finger thoracostomy followed 
by an overlying vented chest seal is superior with 
respect to time, technical skill, and contamination 
than TT, but this has not been studied. The classical 
teaching of applying a three-sided dressing to allow 
for air to escape the chest has no evidence to support 
it, whereas vented chest seals have been very effective 
in animal models. TT may be favored when there is 
a Pleur-evac (Teleflex, Morrisville, NC) available and 
the casualty is spontaneously breathing, or if there is 
suspected significant hemothorax and a cell saver is 
available for autotransfusion. Neither of these situations is likely in the prehospital environment due to 
logistical restraints.
Open pneumothoraces are usually not lethal in and 
of themselves, but can lead to significant morbidity 
when they are large enough to compromise the natural 
physiology of breathing. When the chest wall defect is 
equal to or greater than two-thirds the size of the trachea, air will preferentially enter the chest through the 
wound during normal spontaneous respirations. 60 The 
use of a fully occlusive dressing, which has been recommended for decades, does not allow accumulating 
air to exit the chest. This has the potential of converting 
a less lethal wound (open pneumothorax) to a more 
lethal one (TPTX). 61 Thus, occlusive/non-vented chest 
seals require constant vigilance if used, which is not a 
desirable situation in a far-forward environment with 
possible multiple casualties and a rapidly evolving 
tactical situation. For this reason the current recommendation is to use vented chest seals to treat open 
pneumothoraces. Several studies indicate that most 
commercial vented chest seals are highly efficacious, 
unlikely to lose their seal (a dangerous complication) 
or become ineffective due to clotting blood. 62,63
DAMAGE CONTROL RESUSCITATION 
“Damage control” is a term of naval origin and 
refers to the capacity of a ship to absorb damage and 
maintain mission integrity. If a ship is damaged and 
begins to take on water, there are approaches used 
to minimize the damage so that the vessel remains 
afloat and suffers minimal “physiological disruption” to its critical systems and infrastructure. The 
term “damage control surgery” (DCS) was coined to 
refer to this same approach in a severely traumatized 
patient. DCS entails immediate surgery to control 
internal bleeding and minimize contamination from 
gastrointestinal trauma. In the present era, DCS has 
become the standard of care for battlefield trauma 
surgery. “Damage control resuscitation” (DCR), a 
logical offshoot of DCS, has become the standard 
of care for expeditionary medical facilities treating 
combat casualties. 64,65 DCR focuses on minimizing the 
effects of the lethal triad (hypothermia, acidosis, and 
coagulopathy). It entails early transfusion of blood 
products to restore intravascular volume (minimizing crystalloid use), permissive hypotension, keeping 
the patient warm, and using adjuncts to support the 
coagulation system (tranexamic acid [TXA], fibrinogen, Factor VIIa). DCR should begin at the point of 
injury and continue to the time of initial lifesaving 
surgery and beyond.
Because 90% of battlefield deaths occur before the 
casualty reaches a medical facility, there is a keen 
interest in pushing damage control principles and 
techniques further forward. 66 Care of the severely 
traumatized combatant is difficult at the point of injury 
and differs significantly from civilian practice. Civilian 
concepts and procedures often have to be “unlearned,” 
and military medical practice may need adjustment to 
better fit the tactical situation. 67 Additionally, although 
the categories of shock are useful as a theoretical 
construct, in reality they are often unreliable in the 
individual casualty. In one study, for patients who had 
an estimated blood loss of over 40% (class IV shock), 
the median heart rate was 95 and the median systolic 
blood pressure was 120. 68 Vital sign derangements may 
signal that a patient is in shock, but normal signs do 
not ensure they are not in shock.
Ideally, casualties beginning to show the first signs 
of shock should receive fresh whole blood (FWB), or 
blood components that mimic the constituency of 
whole blood. Because this is not logistically feasible for 
mobile combat units dispersed away from organized 
medical facilities, a focus on hypotensive resuscitation 
and minimal fluid administration appears to be the 
only legitimate strategy. Circulatory access is obtained 
via the IV or intraosseous (IO) route, and fluid is administered to achieve enough perfusion to maintain a 
conscious patient with a palpable radial pulse. If fluid 
must be administered, it can be given via oral, IV, or 
IO routes. 69 
488
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
An important caveat to fluid resuscitation is that it 
must be determined whether the patient’s hemorrhage 
is definitively controlled versus uncontrolled (or even 
possibly uncontrolled). For casualties with definitively 
controlled external hemorrhage, the resuscitation 
endpoint should be an adequate SBP (≥110). 70 For any 
casualty with controlled external hemorrhage, but 
at risk of ongoing internal hemorrhage (eg, from a 
gunshot wound to the torso or high amputation from 
an improvised explosive device), the provider should 
still consider hypotensive resuscitation targets, which 
are adequate mentation, a palpable radial pulse, or an 
SBP of 90 to 110,70 as the mainstay of prehospital resuscitation endpoints. While it may seem unnerving and 
counterintuitive based on protocols in civilian trauma, 
hypotensive resuscitation has reduced the risk of death 
in all trials in which it has been investigated. 71
The 1994 landmark, paradigm-shifting paper by 
Bickell et al showed that crystalloid resuscitation for 
patients with penetrating torso trauma produced 
a lower survival rate than delayed resuscitation. 72 
However, transport times in this study averaged 
15 minutes, whereas, in the combat environment, 
evacuation times can be from 2 to 4 hours (Desert 
Storm) to 15 hours (Mogadishu), depending on the 
conflict, region, and existing military presence and 
medical evacuation structure. 73 Fortunately, ATLS 
now only recommends 1 L of crystalloid. 74 The 
Bickell study, along with mounting information 
that IV fluid resuscitation exacerbates the profound 
inflammatory state of hemorrhagic shock, prompted 
the Office of Naval Research to ask the Institutes of 
Medicine to review fluid resuscitation strategies. 75 
Ultimately, the TCCC guidelines were rewritten to 
limit fluid resuscitation to patients in shock, with the 
use of blood products, lower volumes, and specific 
endpoints as a goal. 76 
Since the 2005 World Health Organization expert 
consensus panel on prehospital care for the trauma 
patient found little evidence that advanced prehospital 
interventions were superior to basic interventions,77 it 
is imperative that every medical provider be an expert 
in hemorrhage control, know how to quickly move the 
patient to a surgical facility, and be cognizant of the 
nuances of DCR. When considering fluid resuscitation 
for the patient in shock, there are four objectives in the 
prehospital setting:
 
1. Enhance clot forming ability.
 
2. Minimize the negative effects of resuscitation 
(edema, hemodilution).
 
3. Restore intravascular volume and organ 
perfusion.
 
4. Optimize the delivery of oxygen.
Other than FWB, the ideal resuscitative fluid is yet 
to be found. The debate about crystalloids versus colloids in the treatment of shock has continued unabated 
since they were introduced. Blood components such 
as packed red blood cells (PRBCs), while necessary 
to transport oxygen, also increase morbidity and 
mortality. 78 Artificial hemoglobin carriers have significant side effects that continue to restrict their use 
in humans. No resuscitative fluid is totally benign, 
and all may potentiate the cellular injury associated 
with hemorrhagic shock if not used judiciously. These 
agents should be viewed as medications with specific 
indications and dosing parameters.
It should be noted that only combined resuscitation 
with red blood cells (RBCs) and plasma is associated 
with improved survival, even when evacuation times 
are short. 79 In a recent article on fluid resuscitation by 
the CoTCCC,80 the preferred fluids for hemorrhagic 
shock in descending order of preference were:
 
1. FWB.
 
2. 1:1:1 plasma, RBCs, and platelets.
 
3. 1:1 plasma and RBCs.
 
4. Reconstituted dried plasma, liquid plasma, 
or thawed plasma alone or RBCs alone.
 
5. Hextend.
 
6. Lactated Ringer (LR) solution or Plasma-Lyte 
A (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL).
Fresh Whole Blood
Nothing replaces lost blood from hemorrhage like 
FWB from an immediate donor. Because it is fresh, one 
unit has the hemostatic power of 10 units of platelets. 81 
The only prehospital guidelines that currently support 
the use of FWB are the TCCC guidelines (TACEVAC 
section). Whole blood transfusion was the standard 
for resuscitation from hemorrhagic shock in World 
War II, Korea, and Vietnam. 82 Since the Vietnam era, 
objections to FWB use have arisen, including the 
risks of ABO incompatibility, transfusion-related 
disease, graft versus host disease (GVHD), and reduced exercise tolerance in donors. However, current 
evidence appears to refute these concerns. In OIF III 
(2003–2011), 13% of all transfused patients received 
FWB83 without significant sequelae. Approximately 
10,000 FWB transfusions to US personnel occurred 
in OEF and OIF, and only two complications of survivable transfusion-related reactions were recorded, 
as well as one fatal case of GVHD. 84 In an article on 
blood donation in the Norwegian Special Forces, there 
was no decrease in either physical or skill (shooting) 
performance after donating one unit (450 mL) of 
blood for “buddy transfusion.”85 Cold-stored whole 
489
Tactical Medicine
blood is FDA approved for up to 21 days; however, 
FWB is not currently FDA approved and has been 
utilized only in emergency combat trauma scenarios. 
Currently the US Army’s 75th Ranger Regiment has 
an approved protocol86 based on updated evidence87 
that allows providers to draw O-negative blood from 
donors prior to missions for use in case of severe 
trauma with significant hemorrhage. This program is 
now becoming more widely used within US Special 
Operations Command.
Stored Constituents of Blood
The past century has witnessed many changes to 
the practice of blood administration. One of the most 
profound has been the transition from using whole 
blood to using components of blood (RBCs, plasma, 
platelets), which came about without clinical validation of which patients needed which products. 
Stored blood transfusion involves major complications, and is an independent predictor of mortality 
in civilian trauma, likely due to the toxic products of 
stored components that accumulate over time. 78 When 
FWB is not available, thawed plasma at a 1:1 ratio 
with PRBCs is the current resuscitation strategy for 
hypovolemic shock due to blood loss at combat support hospitals. Simultaneously, a whole blood donor 
drive is initiated. 
Plasma alone is an effective volume expander, 
does not activate the pathways of cellular injury, and 
provides physiologic quantities and ratios of clotting 
factors. Freeze-dried plasma is used extensively by 
the Israeli Defense Forces,88 but is approved for use by 
only a few US special forces far forward. Freeze-dried 
plasma can be reconstituted in minutes and given to 
expand plasma volume, provide clotting factors, and 
buffer the acidosis that occurs with shock. However, 
plasma has all the drawbacks of blood product transfusion, and frozen plasma involves the logistical burden 
of cold storage and transport. DoD-funded investigations continue on autologous freeze-dried plasma, 
and its use may spread from the special operations 
community to regular combat medical units. Currently 
freeze-dried plasma is not FDA approved, and there 
is no mechanism by which conventional medics and 
corpsmen can utilize it.
Artificial Colloids
Colloids are more effective than crystalloids at 
expanding plasma volume because of the oncotic 
properties of the large molecules they contain. 89 There 
are many colloids on the market, but the most widely 
used in TCCC is Hextend, which is a hydroxyethyl 
starch in a balanced salt solution similar to LR. Another 
product, Hespan (B. Braun Medical, Bethlehem, PA), 
is hydroxyethyl starch in a normalized saline solution. 
Hextend remains the TCCC forward resuscitative fluid 
of choice due to its volume-expanding capabilities (6 to 
8 hours), decreased logistical burden, and less deleterious coagulation effects than Hespan. 90
A recent Cochrane review concluded that when 
fluid resuscitation is required, there is no appreciable 
difference in outcomes after resuscitation with colloids versus crystalloids. 91 Because combat casualties 
are resuscitated in a much different environment than 
civilians, however, colloids offer the distinct advantage 
of less volume and weight. Resuscitation with Hextend 
results in one-third the volume requirement of LR92; 
additionally, it has a favorable acid-base profile and has 
been shown to decrease overall fluid requirements. For 
these reasons Hextend has replaced LR as the fluid of 
choice carried by medics in the field. 93 
Crystalloids
During the Vietnam War, crystalloid resuscitation 
became the standard of care, and volume replacement was recommended at three times the amount of 
blood loss. 94 This approach was later found to worsen 
outcomes and also contributed to the development of 
abdominal compartment syndrome and acute respiratory distress syndrome (known as Da Nang lung when 
it was first characterized). 95,96 It was not until the Bickell 
study that this practice of aggressive crystalloid resuscitation began to change. This is not a new concept; 
in 1918 Cannon et al had written that “inaccessible 
or uncontrolled sources of blood loss should not be 
treated with IV fluids until the time of surgical control.”97 Fluid resuscitation in uncontrolled hemorrhage 
is now known to dilute clotting factors and exacerbate 
coagulopathy, worsen acidosis (normal saline [NS] and 
LR have a pH of 5. 0 and 6. 5, respectively), and disrupt 
early thrombus. 98 
Crystalloid resuscitation may be considered if 
no other fluids are available and the casualty needs 
some sort of volume replacement to maintain blood 
pressure and mental status. Large volume IV fluid resuscitation is associated with coagulopathy on arrival 
in the emergency department99 and contributes to the 
coagulopathy of trauma. 100 This coagulopathy almost 
doubles mortality in certain patients. 101 Crystalloids 
distribute rapidly to the interstitial space and are not 
as effective for expanding blood volume as colloids, 
adding only 275 mL to the intravascular space for 
every 1 L infused. 102 If blood products or Hextend are 
not available, LR is preferred to NS because it does not 
induce hyperchloremic acidosis as NS does. 103
490
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Special mention must be made of one particular 
crystalloid, hypertonic saline (HTS), for use in the 
casualty with multitrauma who also has traumatic 
brain injury (TBI). In TBI, secondary injury, usually 
related to some degree of hypotension or hypoxia, 
may be avoidable. Mortality doubles in a hypotensive 
patient with TBI when compared to normotensive 
TBI casualties. 104 HTS may be the optimal resuscitative fluid for these patients when hypotension must 
be treated and cerebral edema avoided. 17 HTS refers 
to any concentration of sodium chloride above physiologic (0. 9%); common concentrations are 2%, 3%, 5%, 
7%, and 23%. The osmotic actions of HTS have been 
well categorized. The discovery of extraosmotic actions such as immune modulation and augmentation 
of cerebral blood flow are intriguing and invite further 
study, but the evidence remains mixed. A metaanalysis 
of six trials and 604 subjects showed that HTS-dextran 
provided a discharge survival rate of 38%, versus 27% 
for the NS control, in the subgroup of patients who 
had sustained multitrauma with concomitant TBI. 105 
A randomized, controlled trial in TBI cases comparing 
HTS (7. 5%) to LR showed no difference in ultimate 
neurologic outcomes or mortality. 106 Data from the 
Research Outcomes Consortium likewise showed no 
benefit of HTS solutions in TBI. 107 Once started, HTS 
should be titrated to keep serum sodium concentrations at 145 to 155 mEq/L, and cessation should be 
gradual secondary to concerns of rebound cerebral 
edema and herniation. 
Best Strategies for Fluid Resuscitation
Two broad approaches may be considered for 
resuscitation in combat casualties. In the delayed resuscitation approach, fluid is withheld until bleeding 
is definitively controlled. This was the approach in the 
Bickell paper; it is appropriate if transport times are 
very short, typically less than 30 minutes. In contrast, 
permissive hypotension is the TCCC-recommended 
approach. Here fluid is given only to improve SBP 
to approximately 90 mm Hg, which corresponds to 
preserved mentation and a palpable radial pulse. This 
standard TCCC approach should be utilized in almost 
all combat casualty care scenarios. A Hextend bolus 
of 500 mL is given if blood products are not available, 
and this may be repeated once if required by resuscitation endpoints. 
Resuscitation endpoints generally used are mental 
status, heart rate, SBP, mean arterial pressure (MAP), 
skin texture and color, and urine output. Laboratory 
tests such as lactate or base deficit are beneficial only 
to guide resuscitation after hemorrhage has been controlled. 108 However, these tests are usually not available 
until a Role 2 facility is encountered and thus are not 
useful in the initial management of severely injured 
casualties. Once natural hemostasis has occurred in 
penetrating trauma animal models, re-bleeding has 
been found to occur at around 94 mm Hg. 109 In the only 
randomized controlled trial in humans of hypotensive 
endpoints versus normal resuscitation strategy, there 
was no difference in survival. 110 Thus it is reasonable 
to promote an endpoint strategy of normal mentation 
and an SBP of 80 to 90 mm Hg or MAP of 60 to 65 mm 
Hg, corresponding to a palpable radial pulse.
Hypothermia is common in combat casualties, 
and even mild hypothermia can affect the function of 
platelets and clotting factors. 111 Thus, the capability 
to deliver warmed fluids is critical in the far-forward 
setting. To preserve heat in casualties, the patient’s 
clothing and protective gear should be left on (when 
feasible) during transport. Forward providers should 
have hypothermia prevention management kits available and use them aggressively. Doors should be 
closed on vehicles and aircraft during transport. 
Emerging Adjuncts to Damage Control 
Resuscitation
Advances in controlling extremity and junctional 
hemorrhage over the last decade have left truncal 
hemorrhage as the source of most potentially survivable injuries. In the landmark paper by Eastridge et al, 
truncal hemorrhage represented 67. 3% of all potentially 
survivable injuries due to hemorrhage. 10 Two innovations may possibly contribute to reducing deaths due 
to truncal hemorrhage when there is a delay to surgical 
care. Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of 
the aorta (REBOA) involves placement of an endovascular balloon into the aorta to control hemorrhage and 
increase afterload in patients with exsanguinating hemorrhage. Civilian trauma centers have successfully used 
REBOA, and it is beginning to transition into forward 
resuscitative care. 112 It is imperative that the balloon 
be placed either in zone I (supraceliac aorta) or zone 
III (infrarenal aorta). Zone I placement is essentially a 
balloon “cross-clamp” of the aorta, so balloon inflation 
time is limited to less than one hour due to mesenteric 
ischemia. Zone III placement may be helpful in cases 
of pelvic fractures, but placement here with a vascular 
wound proximal to the balloon would result in more 
rapid exsanguination. 113 In civilian trauma centers, 
placement is confirmed by fluoroscopy, which is not 
available in forward theater. The use of ultrasound is 
difficult due to its user-dependent nature. Therefore, a 
landmark approach is normally used. Because of mixed 
civilian results, lack of methods to reliably confirm balloon position, and uncertainty of the internal wounding 
491
Tactical Medicine
pattern, REBOA is not currently recommended for use 
in the combat environment, but research on the technique will continue.
Self-expanding polyurethane foam to control severe 
intraabdominal hemorrhage is also gaining traction 
as a method to decrease potentially survivable deaths 
due to truncal bleeding. It is nearing FDA approval, 
is more easily administered by prehospital providers 
than REBOA, and may be used for up to 4 hours as a 
hemostatic bridge to definitive surgical care. 114
MEDICATIONS
Tranexamic Acid
The acute coagulopathy of trauma is gaining recognition as a significant factor in treating patients 
with traumatic hemorrhage. Recent reports show that 
coagulation derangements are present on presentation to the emergency department in 38% of combat 
casualties115 and 25% of civilian trauma victims116 
presenting to a level I trauma center. While the causes 
of coagulopathy are multifactorial (consumption 
of factors and platelets, dilution from prehospital 
resuscitation, hypothermia, acidosis, inflammation), 
the phenotype of this initial coagulopathy appears 
to be primarily fibrinolytic (increased fibrinolysis), 
particularly when standard prehospital resuscitation 
strategies are followed. 117 If this is true, then stabilizing 
initial thrombus with an antifibrinolytic such as TXA 
makes sense. Several recent studies have shown this 
to be an effective therapy to decrease mortality from 
hemorrhage in trauma patients.
The largest and most important study was the 
CRASH-2 trial. 118 This prospective randomized controlled trial included 20,211 trauma patients with 
significant hemorrhage or at risk of significant hemorrhage. The patients were randomized to receive either 
placebo or TXA (1 g of TXA over 10 minutes within 8 
hours of injury, and then an additional 1 g as an infusion over 8 hours). Absolute risk reduction in the TXA 
group was significant in this trial, and the number 
needed to treat was around 68 overall.
Early treatment with TXA is important. The 
CRASH-2 trial analysis showed a significant survival 
advantage if given within 1 hour of injury (P < . 0001). 
If given from 1 to 3 hours post injury, the significance 
fell (P = . 03). Given after the 3-hour point, the risk of 
death due to bleeding increased (P = . 004). 119 
The MATTERS trial, a retrospective study of 896 
patients who required a blood transfusion, took place 
at Camp Bastion, a large combat support hospital in 
Helmand Province, Afghanistan. 120 In this trial, 293 
casualties received TXA (the remainder did not). The 
TXA group had a lower unadjusted mortality (P = . 03) 
despite being more severely injured (higher injury 
severity score; P < . 001). Benefit was greatest in a subgroup of patients who received a massive transfusion 
(P = . 004). TXA use was independently associated with 
survival (CI 3–17) and less coagulopathy (P = . 003).
Dosing of TXA is per current TCCC guidelines: if 
it is anticipated that a patient will need a significant 
blood transfusion (eg, presents with hemorrhagic 
shock, one or more major amputations, penetrating 
torso trauma, or evidence of severe bleeding), then 1 
g of TXA in 100 mL NS or LR should be administered 
as soon as possible, ideally within the first hour of 
injury. The second infusion of 1 g TXA should begin 
after other IV fluid treatment. The greatest survival 
benefit reported is when TXA is given within 1 hour 
of injury and continues for up to 3 hours after injury. If 
it is initiated beyond that timeframe, the risk of death 
due to bleeding could increase.
Pain Control
Recent military conflicts have prompted significant 
advances in controlling pain (see Chapter 36, Acute 
Pain Management in the Deployed Environment). 
These advances have benefited patients (and providers) from the point of injury through definitive care 
in the United States. Three areas in particular have 
driven this change. The first is the need to deliver 
pain medications without IV access. This has led to 
advances in transmucosal (oral and nasal) medication administration. The second is the resurgence of 
ketamine use in the US military. During a period when 
the US military relied on the morphine auto-injector, 
other military121,122 and civilian123 providers around 
the world in austere, resource-limited situations were 
proving ketamine’s safety and efficacy. The third is the 
recognition that early control of pain on the battlefield 
decreases the incidence and severity of posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD). 124
Advanced knowledge of limited resuscitation strategies among providers has decreased the need for IV or 
IO access in the combat environment. Access is logistically challenging (carrying supplies) and technically 
difficult (unsterile conditions, evacuation, and vehicle 
movement) in the combat environment. Providers are 
comfortable and familiar with oral medications such 
as nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 
acetaminophen, and opiates/opioids from training 
and hospital practice. They are much less likely to 
be familiar with oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate 
492
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
(OTFC), expanded use and variable-dose ketamine, 
and the intranasal administration of medications including fentanyl, ketamine, midazolam, naloxone, and 
flumazenil. In 2014, the CoTCCC published expanded 
pain control guidelines under the title “Triple Option 
Anesthesia,” and the Wilderness Medical Society 
published “Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of 
Acute Pain in Remote Environments.” Both organizations included recommendations for the use of OTFC 
and ketamine. 125,126
While a broad array of analgesic and sedative 
options exist, this discussion will focus on OTFC, 
ketamine, and intranasal medication administration. 
Common hospital practice for pain control relies 
primarily on acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and oral or IV 
opioids. Very few formal training programs include 
a discussion of alternative drugs and alternative 
routes of administration. One exception is ketamine, 
which has seen an expanded profile of use over the 
last decade in civilian care. Ketamine has been used 
extensively outside of the United States and by other 
militaries for decades. Low-dose ketamine is used in 
acute and chronic pain control, intraoperative and 
postoperative burn care, depression, emergence reactions to general anesthesia, and postoperative opioid 
hyperalgesia. Historical concerns related to increases 
in intracranial127–129 and intraocular pressure130 have 
been dispelled by recent literature. Ketamine has 
been shown not to increase the incidence of PTSD 
in at-risk military personnel131 and has even been 
used to treat PTSD. 132 Another benefit of ketamine is 
multiple routes of administration, including IV, IM, 
and intranasally. Given logistical challenges in the 
austere setting, intranasal delivery can be particularly useful. Other medications that can be delivered 
intranasally include fentanyl, midazolam, naloxone, 
and flumazenil.
Low-dose (subdissociative) ketamine is typically 
given at doses of 0. 2 to 0. 5 mg/kg by slow IV push or 
drip over several minutes. Dissociative dosing is 1 to 
2 mg/kg IV or 4 to 5 mg/kg IM. Intranasal dosing is 
0. 5 mg/kg/dose. TCCC guidelines recommend titrating 
lower doses of ketamine until pain control is achieved 
or nystagmus is observed. In the authors’ experience, 
dissociation via the intranasal route is very difficult 
to achieve because the patient becomes less and less 
cooperative. 
No discussion of ketamine would be complete 
without a discussion of its psychiatric and behavioral 
side effects. These behavioral disturbances are classically referred to as emergence reactions, but they 
actually occur in two distinct phases. The first is during 
the titration of low-dose ketamine, when the patient 
becomes incompletely dissociated and occasionally 
quite difficult to control. These side effects may also be 
observed as dissociative doses of ketamine are wearing 
off, which is the classic emergence reaction. In either 
instance, most cases resolve with reassurance, but 
some cases may require additional medications. The 
tactical situation dictates whether the provider needs 
to calm the patient with midazolam or completely 
dissociate the patient with additional ketamine. One 
example is during TACEVAC, when uncooperative or 
agitated patients present a danger to themselves, the 
providers, and the aircraft/aircrew. Midazolam can 
cause respiratory depression, which is challenging to 
observe and manage during flight, so increasing the 
dosage of ketamine may be the best option.
Several military studies have been published on 
the safety and efficacy of OTFC. The original dose of 
1,600 µg was shown to be safe and effective without 
side effects, except in cases where IV opioids were 
coadministered. 133 A more extensive and recent review of lower dose OTFC (800 µg) demonstrated 
safety and efficacy as well. 134 Wedmore was the first 
to discuss the additional safety measure of taping the 
fentanyl “lollipop” to the patient’s finger. 135 This has 
commonly been described as the “SOF PCA” (Special 
Operation Forces patient-controlled analgesia). The 
weight of the patient’s upper extremity will pull the 
medication out of the mouth when and if the patient 
becomes somnolent. This prevents both overdosing 
and choking on the lollipop.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics also fall into a specific group of medications that are considered time sensitive in combat 
injuries. 136 Early tactical care recommendations for antibiotics were based on likely tactical situations where 
irrigation and surgical debridement were not immediately available. 137 Choices focused on antibiotics with 
the most favorable logistical (and tactical) properties, 
such as broad spectrum of action, ease of administration, long duration of action, and lower cost. 138 
Current TCCC guidelines recommend moxifloxacin, cefotetan, or ertepenem for use, as soon as tactically possible, at the point of injury. Moxifloxacin is 
given to casualties who can tolerate oral medication 
administration without vomiting or risk of aspiration. 
Ertepenem or cefotetan can be given IV or IM for patients unable to tolerate oral medications. Anecdotally, 
medics tend to prefer ertepenem for its once-daily 
dosing and lack of reactivity in patients allergic to 
penicillin or cephalosporin. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are discontinued as soon as possible, tailored to 
the patient’s wounding pattern and operative care. In 
addition to published TCCC guidelines and updates, 
493
Tactical Medicine
the best available evidence and expert recommendations were compiled in 2008139 and updated in 2011 
by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the 
Surgical Infection Society. 140–142 
In 2009, a review of antibiotic use in patients with 
combat wounds who were treated and returned to 
duty found decreased wound infection rates with 
systemic antibiotic prophylaxis. 143 More recently, in 
2011, a larger retrospective review of point-of-care 
antibiotics was conducted. The authors found no 
benefit and no harm from antibiotics alone (such as 
multidrug-resistant infections). 144 This study does not 
provide enough information to dissuade providers 
from administering antibiotics early; rather, it demonstrates the complicated nature of the problem, which 
includes difficulty adhering to guidelines,145 mechanism of injury,146 evacuation time, and time to surgical 
care. The 2011 study also supports data showing that 
multidrug-resistant pathogens do not contaminate the 
initial wound. 144,147,148 Rather, colonization and infection by multidrug-resistant pathogens are healthcare 
related. 149,150 The 2011 panel weighed their recommendations for antibiotics as 1C (strong recommendation/
low-quality evidence) for point-of-injury antibiotics, 
and 1B (strong recommendation/moderate-quality 
evidence) for the antibiotics to be given within 3 hours. 
The fact that no recommendation received a 1A (strong 
recommendation/high-quality evidence) reinforces the 
challenges associated with reviewing care in the most 
austere conditions. 
CASE REVIEW 
A remarkable example of coordinated use of recent 
techniques, tactics, and procedures in tactical medicine 
occurred on a cold night in mountainous terrain in 
February 2016. During a Special Operations-led assault force mission in the early morning hours, several 
members were injured, including one US combatant 
who was shot in the chest twice just above the ballistic 
plates in his armor with 7. 62-mm caliber rounds. The 
patient was immediately moved to a protected area 
and evaluated. In addition to the gunshot wounds 
(two entrance wounds in the high chest and one large 
exit wound in the back) he had shrapnel wounds 
from a grenade on his arms and face. IV access was 
obtained early, and TXA and freeze-dried plasma 
were administered. The patient was then transported 
by litter (during which his IV was lost) to a helicopter 
landing zone and turned over to an aeromedical team. 
The patient was evacuated via a 15-minute flight to a 
prepositioned DCS team. 
During the flight, evaluation showed the patient in 
obvious shock with a weak radial pulse at 130 beats 
per minute and an oxygen saturation in the 80s. Due 
to the ambient temperature, the oxygen saturation 
was deemed unreliable and mental status was used 
as evidence of end-organ perfusion (pain medication 
was withheld after the patient stated he could forgo 
it). A sternal IO needle was placed when no adequate 
IV access could be found, and the patient received an 
additional unit of RBCs. Also, a small amount of hemostatic dressing was used on the still actively bleeding 
exit wound, and a vented chest seal was placed over 
the dressing. An ultrasound quickly ruled out cardiac 
tamponade or intrabdominal bleeding, but showed 
large hemothoraces bilaterally. Additional needle 
thoracostomies were performed bilaterally due to respiratory distress. The patient was more comfortable 
sitting up, so he was allowed to remain in that position 
during the flight.
On arrival to the surgical team, the patient continued to worsen. Tube thoracostomies were performed 
bilaterally, with a few hundred milliliters drained 
from the left and two liters drained from the right. 
The patient was intubated, and a large bore central 
line was placed. He subsequently lost vital signs, 
and a left lateral thoracotomy was performed. Open 
cardiac massage was performed for several minutes 
while intravascular volume was restored. The casualty regained spontaneous circulation after several 
minutes, and resuscitation continued while he was 
transported to a Role 3 facility. His Purple Heart ceremony was conducted the next day, and his recovery 
was uneventful. 151
This case is presented because it represents the 
successful translation of evidence-based trauma 
care to the far-forward environment. The casualty’s 
DCR was begun at the point of injury with an antifibrinolytic and plasma. IO access was used when 
IV access was difficult. No crystalloid, other than 
that used to carry reconstituted medications, was 
used at all. His 1:1 RBC-to-plasma resuscitation was 
continued nonstop until he reached Role 3 care (at 
a combat support hospital). The surgical team was 
very far forward, while still in a secure location. 
If the surgical team had not been located where 
it was, the next nearest location would have been 
over 2 hours away by helicopter. If standard ATLS 
protocols had been followed by the aeromedical 
team, the patient would have been intubated or a 
surgical airway placed (because he was hypoxic 
with bleeding around the mouth), he would have 
been given crystalloid, and he would have received 
medications that might alter his mental status. If any 
494
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
of these maneuvers had been used, the patient might 
not have survived. The medical team was extremely 
well trained and drilled together intensely and often, 
which is a testament to the value placed on military 
medicine. Military medical providers protect those 
who protect the nation. 
CONCLUSION
Optimized medical care in the tactical setting is a 
challenging and rapidly evolving field. If approached 
with the right mindset, the correct predeployment 
training, and a proper understanding of the both the 
principles of Tactical Combat Casualty Care and the 
overall context of the current resources in the area of 
operations, good outcomes will be ensured for those 
who go forth to secure the interests of the nation.
REFERENCES
 
1. Salomone JP, McSwain NE, eds. Preface. In: Prehospital Trauma Life Support. 6th ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby; 2007.
 
2. Trunkey DD. History and development of trauma care in the United States. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2000;May(374):36–46.
 
3. Croce MA, Livingston DH, Luchette FA, Mackersie RC, eds. American Association for the Surgery of Trauma 75th Anniversary, 1938-2013. Chicago, IL: American Association for the Surgery of Trauma; 2013. 
 
4. King B, Jatoi I. The Mobile Army Surgical Hospital (MASH): a military and surgical legacy. J Natl Med Assoc. 
2005;97(5):648–656.
 
5. Maughon JS. An inquiry into the nature of wounds resulting in killed in action in Vietnam. Mil Med. 1970;135:8–13.
 
6. Eastridge BJ, Jenkins D, Flaherty S, et al. Trauma system development in a theater of war: experiences from Operation 
Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom. J Trauma. 2006;61(6):1366–1373.
 
7. Holcomb JB, Stansbury LG, Champion HR, Wade C, Bellamy RF. Understanding combat casualty care statistics. J 
Trauma. 2006;60(2):397–401.
 
8. Holcomb JB, McMullen NR, Pearse L, et al. Causes of death in US Special Operations Forces in the Global War on 
Terrorism: 2001-2004. Ann Surg. 2007;245:986–991.
 
9. Kelly JF, Ritenhour AE, McLaughlin DF, et al. Injury severity and causes of death from Operation Iraqi Freedom and 
Operation Enduring Freedom: 2003-2004 versus 2006. J Trauma. 2008;64:S21-S27.
 10. Eastridge BJ, Mabry RL, Seguin P, et al. Death on the battlefield (2001-2011): Implications for the future of combat 
casualty care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:S431–S437.
 11. Owens BD, Kragh JF Jr, Wenke JC, et al. Combat wounds in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom. J Trauma. 2008;64(2):295–299.
 12. Owens BD, Kragh JF Jr, Macaitis J, et al. Characterization of extremity wounds in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom. J Orthop Trauma. 2007;21(4):254–257.
 13. Lerner EB, Moscati RM. The golden hour: scientific fact or medical “urban legend”? Acad Emerg Med. 2001;8(7):758–760.
 14. Parker PJ. Casualty evacuation timelines: an evidence-based review. J R Army Med Corps. 2007;153(4):274–277.
 15. Butler FK Jr, Hagmann J, Butler EG. Tactical combat casualty care in special operations. Mil Med. 1996;161(Suppl):3–16.
 16. Kotwal RS, Montgomery HR, Kotwal BM, et al. Eliminating preventable death on the battlefield. Arch Surg. 
2011;146(12):1350–1358.
 17. Defense Health Board. Combat Trauma Lessons Learned from Military Operations of 2001-2013. Falls Church, VA: DHB; 
March 9, 2015:39.
495
Tactical Medicine
 18. Mabry RL. Tourniquet use on the battlefield. Mil Med. 2006;171(5):352–356.
 19. Richey SL. Tourniquets for the control of traumatic hemorrhage: a review of the literature. World J Emerg Surg. 
2007;2(1):28–37.
 20. Kragh JF Jr, Swan KG, Smith DC, Mabry RL, Blackbourne LH. Historical review of emergency tourniquet use to stop 
bleeding. Am J Surg. 2012;203(2):242–252.
 21. Lakstein D, Blumenfeld A, Sokolov T, et al. Tourniquets for hemorrhage control on the battlefield: a 4-year accumulated 
experience. J Trauma. 2003;54:S221–S225.
 22. King DR, van der Wilden G, Kragh JF Jr, Blackbourne LH. Forward assessment of 79 prehospital battlefield tourniquets 
used in the current war. J Spec Oper Med. 2012;12(4):33–38.
 23. Kragh JF Jr, O’Neill ML, Walters TJ, et al. Minor morbidity with emergency tourniquet use to stop bleeding in severe 
limb trauma: research, history, and reconciling advocates and abolitionists. Mil Med. 2011;176(7):817–823.
 24. Kragh JF Jr, Watler TJ, Baer DG, et al. Survival with emergency tourniquet use to stop bleeding in major limb trauma. 
Ann Surg. 2009;249(1):1–7.
 25. Kragh JF Jr, Walters TJ, Baer DG, et al. Practical use of emergency tourniquets to stop bleeding in major limb trauma. 
J Trauma. 2008;64:S38–S50.
 26. Wenke JC, Walter TJ, Greydanus DJ, Pusateri AE, Convertino VA. Physiological evaluation of the U.S. Army onehanded tourniquet. Mil Med. 2005;170(9):776–781.
 27. Walters TJ, Mabry RL. Issues related to the use of tourniquets on the battlefield. Mil Med. 2005;170(9):770–775.
 28. Walter TJ, Wenke JC, Kauvar DS, McManus JG, Holcomb JB, Baer DG. Effectiveness of self-applied tourniquets in 
human volunteers. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2005;9:416–422.
 29. Savage E, Pannell D, Payne E, O’Leary T, Tien H. Re-evaluating the field tourniquet for the Canadian Forces. Mil Med. 
2013;178(6):669–675.
 30. Welling DR, Burris DG, Hutton JE, Minken SL, Rich NM. A balanced approach to tourniquet use: lessons learned and 
relearned. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;203(1):106–115.
 31. Drew B, Bird D, Matteucci M, Keenan S. Tourniquet conversion: a recommended approach in the prolonged field care 
setting. J Spec Oper Med. 2015;15(3):23–27.
 32. Shackleford SA, Butler FK Jr, Kragh JF, et al. Optimizing the use of limb tourniquets in tactical combat casualty care: 
TCCC guidelines change 14-02. J Spec Oper Med. 2015;15(1):17–31.
 33. Fitzgibbons PG, Digiovanni C, Hares S, Akelman E. Safe tourniquet use: a review of the evidence. J Am Acad Orthop 
Surg. 2012;20:310–319.
 34. Kragh JF Jr, Baer DG, Walters TJ. Extended (16-hour) tourniquet application after combat wounds: a case report and 
review of the current literature. J Orthop Trauma. 2007;21:274–278.
 35. Woff LH, Adkins TF. Tourniquet problems in war injuries. Bull US Army Med Dep. 1945;87:77–84.
 36. Pusateri AE, Holcomb JB, Kheirabadi BS, Alam HB, Wade CE, Ryan KL. Making sense of the preclinical literature on 
advanced hemostatic products. J Trauma. 2006;60:674–682.
 37. Butler FK Jr, Holcomb JB, Giebner SD, McSwain NE, Bagian J. Tactical combat casualty care 2007: evolving concepts 
and battlefield experience. Mil Med. 2007;172(11 Suppl):1–19.
496
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 38. Arnaud F, Tomori T, Saito R, McKeague A, Prusaczyk WK, McCarron RM. Comparative efficacy of granular and 
bagged formulations of the hemostatic agent QuikClot. J Trauma. 2007;63:775–782.
 39. Rao SB, Sharma CP. Use of chitosan as a biomaterial: studies on its safety and hemostatic potential. J Biomed Mater 
Res. 1997;34:21–28.
 40. Kheirabadi BS, Acheson EM, Deguzman R, et al. Hemostatic efficacy of two advanced dressings in an aortic hemorrhage model in swine. J Trauma. 2005;59:25–35.
 41. Kheirabadi BS, Edens JW, Terrazas IB, et al. Comparison of new hemostatic granules/powders with currently deployed 
hemostatic products in a lethal model of extremity arterial hemorrhage in swine. J Trauma. 2009;66:316–328.
 42. Rall JM, Cox JM, Songer AG, Cestero RF, Ross JD. Comparison of novel hemostatic dressings with QuikClot combat 
gauze in a standardized swine model of uncontrolled hemorrhage. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;75:S150–156.
 43. Conley SP, Littlejohn LF, Henao J, DeVito SS, Zarow GJ. Control of junctional hemorrhage in a consensus swine model 
with hemostatic gauze products following minimal training. Mil Med. 2015;180(11):1189–1195.
 44. Littlejohn LF, Devlin JJ, Kircher SS, et al. Comparison of CELOX-A, Chitoflex, WoundStat, and Combat Gauze hemostatic agents versus standard gauze dressing in control of hemorrhage in a swine model of penetrating trauma. Acad 
Emerg Med. 2011;8(4):340–350.
 45. Kragh JF, Murphy C, Dubick M et al. The tourniquet device concepts for battlefield hemorrhage control. Army Med 
Dept J. April-June 2011:38–48.
 46. Kheirabadi BS, Terrazas IB, Kragh JF Jr, Dubick MA, Blackbourne LH. In vivo assessment of Combat Ready Clamp 
to control junctional hemorrhage in swine. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74:1260–1265.
 47. Mann-Salinas EA, Kragh JF Jr, Dubick MA, Baer DG, Blackbourne LH. Assessment of users to control simulated 
junctional hemorrhage with the combat ready clamp (CRoC™). Int J Burns Trauma. 2013;3(1):49–54.
 48. Gates KS, Baer L, Holcomb JB. Prehospital emergency care: evaluation of the junctional emergency tourniquet tool 
with a perfused cadaver model. J Spec Oper Med. 2014;14(1):40–44.
 49. Mabry RL, Edens JW, Pearse L, Kelly JF, Harke H. Fatal airway injuries in Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2010;14:272–277. 
 50. Mabry RL. An analysis of battlefield cricothyrotomy in Iraq and Afghanistan. J Spec Oper Med. 2012;12:17–23.
 51. Tactical Combat Casualty Care guidelines for medical personnel, 31 January 2017: 3. http://www.naemt.org/docs/
default-source/education-documents/tccc/072016-updates/tccc-guidelines-for-medical-personnel-170131.pdf?sfvrsn=8. 
Accessed May 23, 2017. 
 52. Belmont PJ Jr, Goodman GP, Zacchilli M, Posner M, Evans C, Owens BD. Incidence and epidemiology of combat 
injuries sustained during “the surge” portion of Operation Iraqi Freedom by a U.S. Army brigade combat team. J 
Trauma. 2010;68:204–210.
 53. Shen-Gunther J, Ellison R, Kuhens C, Roach CJ, Jarrard S. Operation Enduring Freedom: trends in combat casualty 
care by forward surgical teams deployed to Afghanistan. Mil Med. 2011;176:67–68.
 54. Beckett A, Savage E, Pannell D, Acharya S, Kirkpatrick A, Tien HC. Needle decompression for tension pneumothorax 
in Tactical Combat Casualty Care: do catheters placed in the midaxillary line kink more often than those in the midclavicular line? J Trauma. 2011;71:S408–S412.
 55. Stevens RL, Rochester AA, Busko J, et al. Needle thoracostomy for tension pneumothorax: failure predicted by chest 
computed tomography. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2009;13:14–17.
 56. Inaba K, Branco BC, Eckstein M, et al. Optimal positioning for emergent needle thoracostomy: a cadaver-based study. 
J Trauma. 2011;71:1099–1103.
497
Tactical Medicine
 57. Martin M, Satterly S, Inaba K, Blair K. Does needle thoracostomy provide adequate and effective decompression of 
tension pneumothorax? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:1412–1417.
 58. Holcomb JB, McManus JG, Kerr ST, Pusateri AE. Needle versus tube thoracostomy in a swine model of traumatic 
tension hemopneumothorax. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2009;13:18–27.
 59. Chen J, Nadler R, Schwatrz D, Tien H, Cap AP, Glassberg E. Needle thoracostomy for tension pneumothorax: the 
Israeli Defense Forces experience. Can J Surg. 2015;58(3):S118–S124.
 60. American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. Thoracic trauma. In: ATLS: Advanced Trauma Life Support for 
Doctors: Student Course Manual. 8th ed. Chicago, IL: ACS; 2008:87.
 61. Haynes BW Jr. Dangers of emergency occlusive dressing in sucking wounds of the chest. J Am Med Assoc. 1952;150:1404.
 62. Arnaud F, Tomori T, Teranishi K, Yun J, McCarron R, Mahon R. Evaluation of chest seal performance in a swine model: 
comparison of Asherman versus Bolin seal. Injury. 2008;39:1082–1088.
 63. Kotora JG, Henao J, Littlejohn LF, Kircher S. Vented chest seals for prevention of tension pneumothorax in a communicating pneumothorax model. J Emerg Med. 2013;45(5):686–694.
 64. Holcomb JB, Jenkins D, Rhee P, et al. Damage control resuscitation: directly addressing the early coagulopathy of 
trauma. J Trauma. 2007;62:307–310.
 65. Joint Trauma System Clinical Practice Guideline: damage control resuscitation. http://jts.amedd.army.mil/assets/docs/
cpgs/JTS_Clinical_Practice_Guidelines_(CPGs)/Damage_Control_Resuscitation_03_Feb_2017_ID18.pdf. Published 
February 3, 2017. Accessed June 26, 2018.
 66. Gerhardt RT, Strandenes G, Cap AP, et al. Remote damage control resuscitation and the Solstrand Conference: defining the need, the language, and a war forward. Transfusion. 2013;53(Suppl 1):S9–S16.
 67. Holcomb JB. Fluid resuscitation in modern combat casualty care: lessons learned from Somalia. J Trauma. 2003;54(Suppl 
5):S46–S51.
 68. Guly HR, Bouamra O, Spiers M, et al. Vital signs and estimated blood loss in patients with major trauma: testing the 
validity of the ATLS classification of hypovolaemic shock. Resuscitation. 2011;82(5):556–559.
 69. Butler FK, Holcomb JB, Schreiber MA, et al. Fluid resuscitation for hemorrhagic shock in Tactical Combat Casualty 
Care: TCCC Guidelines Change 14-01 – 2 June 2014. J Spec Oper Med. 2014;14(3):13–38.
 70. Woolley T, Thompson P, Kirkman E, et al. Trauma Hemostasis and Oxygenation Research Network position paper 
on the role of hypotensive resuscitation as part of remote damage control resuscitation. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2018;84(6S Suppl 1):S3–S13.
 71. Mapstone J, Roberts I, Evans P. Fluid resuscitation strategies: a systematic review of animal trials. J Trauma. 
2003;55(3):571–589.
 72. Bickell WH, Wall MJ, Pepe PE, et al. Immediate versus delayed fluid resuscitation for hypotensive patients with penetrating torso injuries. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:1105–1109.
 73. Koehler RH, Smith S, Bacaner T. Triage of American casualties: the need for change. Mil Med. 1994;159:541–547.
 74. Advanced Trauma Life Support. 9th ed. Chicago, IL: American College of Surgeons; 2013.
 75. Pope AM, French G, Longnecker DE, eds. Fluid Resuscitation: State of the Science for Treating Combat Casualties and Civilian Injuries. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1999.
 76. Butler F. Fluid resuscitation in tactical combat casualty care: brief history and current status. J Trauma. 2011;70(5):S11–
S12.
498
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 77. Sasser S, Varghese M, Kellerman A, Lormand JD. Prehospital Trauma Care Systems. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2005.
 78. Malone DL, Dunne J, Tracy JK, Putnam AT, Scalea TM, Napolitano LM. Blood transfusion, independent of shock 
severity, is associated with worse outcome in trauma. J Trauma. 2003;54:898–905.
 79. Morrison JJ, Oh J, Dubose JJ, et al. En-route care capability from point of injury impacts mortality after severe wartime 
injury. Ann Surg. 2013;257:330–334.
 80. Butler FK, Holcomb JB, Schreiber MA, et al. Fluid resuscitation for hemorrhagic shock in Tactical Combat Casualty 
Care: TCCC guidelines change 14-01—2 June 2014. J Spec Oper Med. 2014;14(3):13–38.
 81. Mohr R, Goor DA, Yellin A, Moshkovitz Y, Shinfeld A, Martinowitz U. Fresh blood units contain large potent platelets 
that improve hemostasis after open heart operations. Ann Thoracic Surg. 1992;53:650–654.
 82. Hooper TJ, De Pasquale M, Strandenes G, Sunde G, Ward KR. Challenges and possibilities in forward resuscitation. 
Shock. 2014;41(1):13–20.
 83. Kauvar DS, Holcomb JB, Norris GC, Hess JR. Fresh whole blood transfusion: a controversial military practice. J Trauma. 
2006;61:181–184.
 84. Hakre S, Peel SA, O’Connell RJ, et al. Transfusion-transmissible viral infections among US military recipients of whole 
blood and platelets during Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. Transfusion. 2011;51(3):473–485.
 85. Strandenes G, Skogrand H, Spinella PC, Hervig T, Rein EB. Donor performance of combat readiness skills of special 
forces soldiers are maintained immediately after whole blood donation: a study to support the development of a 
prehospital fresh whole blood transfusion program. Transfusion. 2013;53(3):526–530.
 86. Fisher AD, Miles EA, Cap AP, Strandenes G, Kane SF. Tactical damage control resuscitation. Mil Med. 2015; 180(8):869–
875.
 87. Strandenes G, Berseus O, Cap AP, et al. Low titer group O whole blood in emergency situations. Shock. 2014;41(Suppl 
1):70–75.
 88. Glassberg E, Nadler R, Rasmussen TE, et al. Point-of-injury use of reconstituted freeze dried plasma as a resuscitative 
fluid: A special report for prehospital trauma care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;75(2):S111–S114. 
 89. Gillies M, Habicher M, Jhanji S, et al. Incidence of postoperative death and acute kidney injury associated with i.v. 
6% hydroxyethyl starch use: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth. 2014;112:25–34.
 90. Gan TJ, Bennett-Guerrero E, Phillips-Bute B, et al. Hextend, a physiologically balanced plasma expander for large 
volume use in major surgery: a randomized phase III clinical trial. Anesth Analg. 1999;88:992–998.
 91. Perel P, Roberts I. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database of Syst 
Rev. 2007;17:CD000567.
 92. Todd SR, Malinoski D, Muller PJ, et al. Hextend attenuates hypercoagulability after severe liver injury in swine. J 
Trauma. 2005;59:589–593.
 93. Beekley AC, Starnes BW, Sebesta JA. Lessons learned from modern military surgery. Surg Clin N Am. 2007;87:157–184.
 94. Shires T, Coln D, Carrico J, Lightfoot S. Fluid therapy in hemorrhagic shock. Arch Surg. 1964;88:688–693.
 95. Kirkpatrick AW, Balogh Z, Ball CG, et al. The secondary abdominal compartment syndrome: iatrogenic or unavoidable? J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:668–679.
 96. Ashbaugh DG, Bigelow DB, Petty TL, Levine BE. Acute respiratory distress in adults. Lancet. 1967;12:319–323.
499
Tactical Medicine
 97. Cannon WB, Faser J, Collew EM. The preventive treatment of wound shock. JAMA. 1918;47:618.
 98. Selby JB, Mathis JE, Berry CF, Hagedorn FN, Illner HP, Shires GT. Effects of isotonic saline solution resuscitation on 
blood coagulation in uncontrolled hemorrhage. Surgery. 1996;119:528–533.
 99. Hubmann B, Lefering R, Taeger G, et al. Influence of prehospital fluid resuscitation on patients with multiple injuries 
in hemorrhagic shock in patients from the DGU trauma registry. J Emerg Trauma Shock. 2011;4:465–471.
 100. Gruen RL, Shreiber M, Balogh ZJ, Pitt V, Narayan M, Maier RV. Haemorrhage control in severely injured patients. 
Lancet. 2012;380:1099–1108.
 101. Lemcke J, Al-Zain F, von der Brelie C, Ebenau M, Meier U. The influence of coagulopathy on outcome after traumatic 
subdural hematoma: a retrospective single-center analysis of 319 patients. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2014;25:353–359.
 102. Marino PL. Colloid and crystalloid resuscitation. In: Marin PL. The ICU Book. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2007:233–253.
 103. Schreiber M. The use of normal saline for resuscitation in trauma. J Trauma. 2011;70:S13–S14.
 104. Manley G, Knudson MM, Morabito D, Damron S, Erickson V, Pitts L. Hypotension, hypoxia, and head injury: frequency, duration, and consequences. Arch Surg. 2001;136(10):1118–1123.
 105. Wade CE, Kramer GC, Grady JJ, Fabian TC, Younes RN. Efficacy of hypertonic 7. 5% saline and 6% dextran-70 in treating trauma: a meta-analysis of controlled clinical studies. Surgery. 1997:122:609–616.
 106. Cooper DJ, Myles PS, McDermott FT, et al. Prehospital hypertonic saline resuscitation of patients with hypotension 
and severe traumatic brain injury: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291(11):1350–1357.
 107. Bulger EM, May S, Brasel KJ, et al. Out-of-hospital hypertonic resuscitation following severe traumatic brain injury: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;304(13):1455–1464. 
 108. Tisherman SA, Barie P, Bokhari F, et al. Clinical practice guideline: endpoints of resuscitation. J Trauma. 2004;57(4):898–
912.
 109. Sondeen JL, Coppes VG, Holcomb JB. Blood pressure at which rebleeding occurs after resuscitation in swine with 
aortic injury. J Trauma. 2003;54(5 Suppl):S110–S117.
 110. Dutton RP, Mackenzie CF, Scalea TM. Hypotensive resuscitation during active hemorrhage: impact on in-hospital 
mortality. J Trauma. 2002;52(6):1141–1146.
 111. Hess JR, Brohi K, Dutton RP, et al. The coagulopathy of trauma: a review of mechanisms. J Trauma. 2008;65(4):748–754.
 112. Brenner ML, Moore LJ, DuBose JJ, et al. A clinical series of resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta 
for hemorrhage control and resuscitation. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;75(3):506–511.
 113. Morrison JJ, Galgon RE, Jansen JO, Cannon JW, Rasmussen TE, Eliason JL. A systematic review of the use of resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta in the management of hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2016;80(2):324–334.
 114. Rago AP, Larentzakis A, Marini J, et al. Efficacy of a prehospital self-expanding polyurethane foam for noncompressible hemorrhage under extreme operational conditions J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(2):324–329.
 115. Niles SE, McLaughlin DF, Perkins JG, et al. Increased mortality associated with the early coagulopathy of trauma in 
combat casualties. J Trauma. 2008;64:1459–1465.
 116. Brohi K, Singh J, Heron M, Coats T. Acute traumatic coagulopathy. J Trauma. 2003;54:1127–1130.
500
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 117. Bolliger D, Szlam F, Levy JH, Molinaro RJ, Tanaka KA. Haemodilution-induced profibrinolytic state is mitigated 
by fresh-frozen plasma: implications for early haemostatic intervention in massive haemorrhage. Br J Anaesth. 
2010;104:318–325.
 118. Shakur H, Roberts I, Bautista R, et al. Effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 
201;376:23–32.
 119. Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, et al. The importance of early treatment with tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma 
patients: an exploratory analysis of the CRASH-2 randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;377:1096–1101.
 120. Morrison JJ, Dubose JJ, Rasmussen TE, Midwinter MJ. Military Application of Tranexamic Acid in Trauma Emergency 
Resuscitation (MATTERs) Study. Arch Surg. 2012;147:113–119.
 121. Austin TR. Ketamine: a revolutionary anesthetic for the battle casualty. J R Army Medical Corps. 1972;118:15–23.
 122. Mercer SJ. “The Drug of War”—a historical review of the use of ketamine in military conflicts. J R Nav Med Serv. 
2009;95(3):145–150.
 123. Green SM, Clem KJ, Rothrock SG. Ketamine safety profile in the developing world: a survey of practitioners. Acad 
Emerg Med. 1996;3(6):598–604.
 124. Holbrook TL, Galarneau MR, Dye JL, Quinn K, Dougherty AL. Morphine use after combat injury in Iraq and posttraumatic stress disorder. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:110–117.
 125. Butler FK, Kotwal RS, Buckenmaier CC 3rd, et al. A triple-option analgesia plan for tactical combat casualty care: 
TCCC Guidelines change 13-04. J Spec Oper Med. 2014;14(1):13–25.
 126. Russell KW, Scaife CL, Weber DC, et al. Wilderness Medical Society practice guidelines for the treatment of acute pain 
in remote environments. Wilderness Environ Med. 2014;25:41–49.
 127. Filanovsky Y, Miller P, Kao J. Myth: ketamine should not be used as an induction agent for intubation in patients with 
head injury. CJEM. 2010;12(2):154–157.
 128. Hughes S. Towards evidence based emergency medicine: best BETs from the Manchester Royal Infirmary. BET 3: is 
ketamine a viable induction agent for the trauma patient with potential brain injury. Emerg Med J. 2011;28(12):1076–1077.
 129. Wang X, Ding X, Tong Y, et al. Ketamine does not increase intracranial pressure compared with opioids: meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. J Anesth. 2014;28(6):821–827.
 130. Drayna PC, Estrada C, Wang W, Saville BR, Arnold DH. Ketamine sedation is not associated with clinically meaningful elevation of intraocular pressure. Am J Emerg Med. 2012;30:1215–1218.
 131. McGee LL, Maani CV, Garza TH, Slater TM, Petz LN, Fowler M. The intraoperative administration of ketamine to burned 
US service members does not increase the incidence of post-traumatic stress disorder. Mil Med. 2014;179(8):41–46.
 132. Feder A, Parides MK, Murrough JW, et al. Efficacy of intravenous ketamine for treatment of chronic posttraumatic 
stress disorder: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(6):681–688.
 133. Kotwal RS, O’Connor KC, Johnson TR, Mosely DS, Meyer DE, Holcomb JB. A novel pain management strategy for 
combat casualty care. Ann Emerg Med. 2004;44(2):121–127.
 134. Wedmore IS, Kotwal RS, McManus JG, et al. Safety and efficacy of oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate for prehospital 
pain control on the battlefield. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:S490–S495.
 135. Wedmore IS, Johnsom T, Czarnik J, Hendrix S. Pain management in the wilderness and operational setting. Emerg 
Med Clin N Am. 2005;23:585–601.
501
Tactical Medicine
 136. Hospenthal DR, Murray CK, Andersen RC, et al. Executive summary: Guidelines for the prevention of infections associated with combat-related injuries: 2011 update: endorsed by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the 
Surgical Infection Society. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 2):S202–209.
 137. Butler FK Jr, Hagmann JH, Richards DT. Tactical management of urban warfare casualties in special operations. Mil 
Med. 2000;165(Suppl:1):1–48.
 138. Butler FK Jr, Hagmann J, Butler EG. Tactical Combat Casualty Care in Special Operations. Mil Med. 1996;161(Suppl 
1):3–16.
 139. Murray CK, Hospenthal DR. Prevention and management of combat-related infections clinical practice guidelines 
consensus conference: overview. J Trauma. 2008;64(Supplement):S207–S208.
 140. D’Avignon LC, Chung KK, Saffle JR, Renz EM, Cancio LC, Prevention of Combat-Related Infections Guidelines Panel. 
Prevention of infections associated with combat-related burn injuries. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 2):S282–289.
 141. Martin GJ, Dunne JR, Cho JM, Solomkin JS, Prevention of Combat-Related Infections Guidelines Panel Prevention of 
infections associated with combat-related thoracic and abdominal cavity injuries. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 2):S270–281.
 142. Murray CK, Obremskey WT, Hsu JR, et al. Prevention of infections associated with combat-related extremity injuries. 
J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 2):S235–257.
 143. Gerhardt RT, Matthews JM, Sullivan SG. The effect of systemic antibiotic prophylaxis and wound irrigation on penetrating combat wounds in a return-to-duty population. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2009;13:500–504.
 144. Murray CK, Hospenthal DR, Kotwal RS, Butler FK. Efficacy of point-of-injury combat antimicrobials. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 
Suppl 2):S307–313.
 145. Lloyd BA, Weintrob AC, Hinkle MK, et al. Adherence to published antimicrobial prophylaxis guidelines for wounded 
service members in the ongoing conflicts in Southwest Asia. Mil Med. 2014;179(3):324–328.
 146. Murray CK, Wilkins K, Molter NC, et al. Infections complicating the care of combat casualties during operations Iraqi 
Freedom and Enduring Freedom. J Trauma. 2011;71(1 Suppl):S62–73.
 147. Murray CK, Roop SA, Hospenthal DR, et al. Bacteriology of war wounds at the time of injury. Mil Med. 2006;171(9):826–
829.
 148. Wallum TE, Yun HC, Rini EA, et al. Pathogens present in acute mangled extremities from Afghanistan and subsequent 
pathogen recovery. Mil Med. 2015;180(1):97–103.
 149. Weintrob AC, Murray CK, Lloyd B, et al. Active surveillance for asymptomatic colonization with multidrug resistant 
gram negative bacilli among injured service members—a three year evaluation. MSMR. 2013;20(8):17–22.
 150. Scott P, Deye G, Srinivasan A, et al. An outbreak of multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii-calcoaceticus 
complex infection in the US military health care system associated with military operations in Iraq. Clin Infect Dis. 
2007;44(12):1577–1584.
 151. McKenzie MR, Parrish EW, Miles EA, et al. A case of prehospital traumatic arrest in a US special operations soldier. 
J Spec Oper Med. 2016;16(3):93–96.
502
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
