503
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
Chapter 34
MASS CASUALTY PREPAREDNESS 
AND RESPONSE
GERARD DeMERS, DO, DHSc, MPH,* and JOHN WIGHTMAN, MD†
INTRODUCTION
SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM
IMPACT ON HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS
GARRISON PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
Emergency Management Cycle
Incident Command System
DEPLOYED ROLES FOR JOINT HEALTH SERVICES
Defense Support to Civil Authorities
Foreign Humanitarian Assistance
Combat Operation Injury Patterns
UNIVERSAL MASS CASUALTY PRINCIPLES
Scene Management
Rapid Needs Assessment
Triage
Casualty Collection Points
Transportation Management
SUMMARY
*Captain, Medical Corps, US Navy; Navy Medicine East EMS/Disaster, Medical Director, Prehospital and Disaster Medicine Specialty Leader, 
Department of Emergency Medicine, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland; Associate Professor, Department 
of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
†Colonel, US Air Force, Medical Corps; formerly, Wing Surgeon, 24th Special Operations Wing, Air Force Special Operations Command, 
Hurlburt Field, Florida; Professor and Chair, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, F. Edward Hébert School of Medicine, 
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
504
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Vulnerant omnes, ultima necat.
“Every hour wounds, the last one kills.”
INTRODUCTION
When a catastrophic event results in patient volume, injury severity, or both greater than a medical 
system is designed to manage at any given time, it is 
identified as a mass casualty situation, or MASCAL 
in military terminology. The only generally accepted 
commonality among these incidents is that they generate more patients and care requirements within a 
span of time than a response system can manage with 
available resources at the normally accepted standard 
of care. According to the World Health Organization 
(WHO), “Mass casualties following disasters and 
major incidents are often characterized by a quantity, 
severity, and diversity of injuries and other patients 
that can rapidly overwhelm the ability of local medical resources to deliver comprehensive and definitive 
medical care.”1
Terms sometimes used interchangeably with MASCAL are tragedy, disaster, catastrophe, and calamity, 
and although none of these have exact definitions 
either, there are distinctions. A tragedy is any event 
that causes great suffering, but that could involve 
one person or a hundred, and is certainly viewed 
through the lens of each person being physically or 
emotionally impacted. Other terms often relate to 
relatively large-scale events causing significant or 
widespread damage. However, none of them have to 
involve casualties. If an entire region’s communications system becomes disabled or destroyed, it might 
be considered a calamity, but no casualties would be 
directly generated by such an event, regardless of 
whether its cause is a natural solar flare or a terrorist 
attack. Collapse of a major bridge might be considered a disaster for the people who depend upon it for 
personal transportation, commerce, and delivery of 
goods and services to specific areas, but if no people 
were on it at the time, it might not result in a mass 
casualty incident (MCI). 
Additionally, what might cause an MCI in a rural 
community may be routine in a major urban area with 
a robust emergency medical services (EMS) system 
and several trauma centers. Multiple-casualty incidents can be effectively and efficiently managed when 
the processes and resources are in place to do so according to the standard of care accepted by the prevailing culture. The purpose of this chapter is to propose 
a systematic approach to mass casualty response for 
the military medical officer (MMO) and suggest considerations for effective medical response operations.
SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM
The scope and nature of MCIs are determined by 
myriad variables: cause (human-made or natural); 
magnitude (small or large); scope (confined or widespread); population density (urban or rural); duration 
(short or long); second-order effects (environmental 
hazards, transportation limitations, communications 
capabilities, medical infrastructure, etc); and many 
more. Total number of casualties (few or many), rate 
of patient encounters (fast or slow), mechanisms of 
injuries (trauma or no trauma), distribution of severity (minor to critical), and location or setting (local 
or remote) also greatly affect the ability of any given 
healthcare system to manage an MCI. 
Causes of MCIs are a convenient way to categorize 
these occurrences, for example, natural versus manmade (the latter can be further divided into accidental 
and intentional). Natural disasters include relatively 
sudden phenomena such as avalanches, earthquakes, 
and tornadoes; rapidly developing situations such as 
cyclones and hurricanes, floods and tsunamis, wildfires, winter storms, and volcanic explosions; or progressively worsening circumstances such as extreme 
heat, drought, and medical epidemics. Accidental 
manmade events may be precipitated by engineering 
failures; explosions at industrial and residential sites; 
or damage to tanks containing hazardous material 
(HAZMAT) being transported by truck, rail, or ship. 
Other manmade incidents may be intentionally caused 
by active shooters or other perpetrators of interpersonal violence, by crashing aircraft into buildings or 
detonation of explosives, by purposefully causing an 
industrial or transportation HAZMAT release, or by 
intentional widespread dissemination of chemical, 
biological, or radiological (CBR) materials through 
a dispersion device or a “dirty bomb.” Every one of 
these actions may result in a wide spectrum of effects, 
depending on multiple other factors.
Explosive events illustrate event magnitude well 
because they can be retrospectively quantified based 
on observations of their effects. The truck-bomb 
detonated in front of the Murrah Federal Building 
in downtown Oklahoma City on April 19, 1995, had 
a blast energy equivalent to 2. 2 metric tons of trinitrotoluene (TNT). There were 164 immediate deaths 
505
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
and 680 people injured,2 many of whom walked to 
a nearby hospital, significantly impacting the care 
delivered in the hospital’s emergency department to 
more seriously injured casualties transported later by 
EMS. 3 By contrast, the natural explosion of Mount Saint 
Helens in Washington State on May 18, 1980, generated a blast energy estimated at 24 million metric tons 
of TNT-equivalents. 4 Nonetheless, this event killed 57 
people,4 so magnitude by itself does not necessarily 
tell the complete story. The volcano was located in a 
rural area and the population at risk had significant 
warning time. 
Scope and population density are related concepts. 
Although large geographical areas or multiple locations may be affected by one or more catastrophic 
events, the number of casualties will in part be determined by how many people are present. Relatively 
few people were killed or injured during the Tunguska 
event of June 30, 1908, when a meteorite estimated to 
be about the size of a football field exploded in the 
atmosphere above a sparsely populated region of 
Siberia with a blast energy equivalent to a 1950s-era 
thermonuclear device. 5 On the other hand, an actual 
nuclear device detonated over urban Hiroshima, Japan, 
on August 6, 1945, immediately killed about 66,000 
people and injured an additional 69,000. Each figure 
was more than a quarter of the population of the city. 6 
However, even population density must be considered 
within the context of the entire event. Drought over a 
large geographical region might lead to casualty numbers one or more orders of magnitude greater than an 
out-of-control fire in a city.
Scope also impacts the burden on a given healthcare 
system. As tragic as the events of September 11, 2001, 
were, the separated crash locations of New York and 
Virginia meant that more resources were available at 
each site than there would have been if all the hijacked 
aircraft had crashed in one location. Furthermore, these 
related but separate incidents—at least the two that 
generated nonfatal casualties to treat—occurred in 
sizable metropolitan areas where robust trauma systems were in place to manage the large total numbers 
of injured victims.
Event duration is important with respect to resource 
depletion. Many healthcare systems may be able to 
manage the first few, first dozen, or even first hundred 
casualties—depending on rate of presentation (see 
discussion below)—but may not be able to sustain a 
previously acceptable level of care if resources are used 
at a rate faster than they can be replenished. Even on 
an individual scale, running out of blood products, for 
example, limits what can be done for just one casualty 
who requires more than is available at any moment. 
On a larger scale, ongoing natural events (eg, multiple 
consecutive storms, persistent flooding, uncontrollable 
fires, epidemics) and other situations such as war can 
produce casualties faster than they can be adequately 
managed locally or redistributed out of an affected 
system, use supplies faster than they can be replaced, 
and exhaust personnel faster than they can be relieved.
Permissive operating environments are those in 
which host nation military and law-enforcement agencies have control of the population and the intent and 
capability to assist operations the responding military 
intends to conduct. Nonpermissive environments are 
those where host nation forces are either incapable of 
maintaining control of the population or are hostile 
to the responding military’s intent. MCIs may occur 
in either. Those resulting from direct-action combat 
engagements will be discussed later in this chapter. 
Complex humanitarian emergencies (CHEs) are a 
special category that can affect millions of people 
through many mechanisms, such as violence, disease, 
starvation, and adverse environmental conditions, over 
many years and sometimes decades. 7 CHEs may be 
characterized by any combination of the following8: 
 
• widespread damage to societies and economies; 
 
• extensive violence or loss of life;
 
• massive displacements of people;
 
• need for large-scale, multifaceted humanitarian assistance;
 
• hindrance or prevention of humanitarian assistance by political and military constraints; 
and
 
• security risks for responders.
The US and other militaries are often called upon 
to respond to these disasters9 (which clearly meet 
Lumley and Ryan’s definition of a catastrophe “where 
the social fabric of society is disrupted and the medical infrastructure fails”10). Sometimes a US military 
intervention within a nonpermissive environment is 
required; Operation Restore Hope to Somalia in the 
early 1990s is a prime example. 11 
IMPACT ON HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS
Disruption or incapacitation of the medical infrastructure is just one of the many second-order effects 
of disasters. This certainly occurred in Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki, with widespread destruction of each city by 
detonation of nuclear weapons. On a smaller scale, this 
also occurred in Joplin, Missouri, when a category EF5 
506
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
tornado ripped through the city and severely damaged 
the only two medical facilities for miles. 12 
The impact of the total number of casualties depends on the availability of space, personnel, equipment, supplies, process efficiencies, and surge capacity 
of the medical system. Surge capacity is the ability of 
any system to rapidly accommodate a large increase 
in throughput. Medical surge capacity involves a continuum with three distinct stages13: 
 
1. Conventional capacity. Traditional and normal patient-care facilities and staff meet their 
normal goals in providing care (status quo).
 
2. Contingency capacity. Minor adaptations 
are made that may have minimal impacts 
on standards of care, but adaptations are 
not enough to result in significant changes 
to standards of care.
 
3. Crisis capacity. A fundamental, systematic 
change to a system in which standards of care 
are significantly altered.
The rate of casualty contacts is an important determinant of responsiveness—both in the field as responders encounter victims, and in treatment facilities 
as casualties arrive on their own or are brought in by 
bystanders or EMS—as part of the demand side of the 
supply-and-demand balance. The more compressed 
the number of casualties per unit of time, the more 
difficult it will be for any system to manage without 
needing to alter the standard of care to do the most 
good for the most people. This concept also relates to 
event duration, insofar as more casualties might be 
adequately managed if they arrive over an extended 
period of time. 
One key ability of a system to respond to an MCI 
is to limit—to the extent possible—the number of patients and the rate of patient encounters for any given 
resource, so that each component of the response is 
still able to conduct relatively normal operations with 
conventional capacity, or satisfactorily adjust to the 
abnormal circumstances employing its contingency 
capacity. Every day across the United Sates, some 
emergency departments efficiently manage 500 patients per 24 hours, while others struggle to effectually 
care for 50. 
Effective casualty management at any location 
often depends on dividing the workload into manageable pieces. Appropriate staging of casualties and 
employment of various transportation resources can 
make casualty movement more efficient. Distributing 
patients to many different facilities based on momentto-moment receiving capacities, as well as matching 
injury type and severity to medical and surgical capabilities, can make the entire system more efficient and 
effective, especially if no one site is forced to transition 
from contingency mode to crisis mode.
The cause of the event often dictates what types of 
casualties are generated. Many cause injuries in one 
form or another, but even within the general category 
of trauma, several factors should be considered. For 
instance, an active shooter will mostly inflict penetrating trauma on the victims. Casualties with gunshot 
wounds to the neck or torso, but without obviously 
fatal head wounds, will usually benefit from transport 
to a trauma center, even if it is 20 minutes further 
away than a less-capable hospital. Because penetrating extremity wounds can often be stabilized in the 
prehospital setting, transportation to a facility even 
farther away might be appropriate for these casualties. 
Casualties from an active-shooter event (ASE) have 
similar injury patterns to those seen in combat environments. Rates of casualty generation often depend 
on the skill and motives of the gunman, density of the 
targeted population, and type of weapon used. 14 In 
one epidemiological study, the most commonly used 
weapon was a pistol (60%), followed by rifles (27%), 
and shotguns (10%). 15 ASEs in the United States occurred 160 times between August 2016 and February 
2018, with casualty numbers ranging from 0 to 53. 15 
The median mortality rate during ASEs is 2, and the 
median number injured is 4. Business settings were 
reported as the most frequently attacked (37%), followed by schools (34%), and outdoor settings (17%). 14
During explosive events, mechanisms of injury include thermal injury from the fireball; direct effects of 
the blast overpressure (ie, primary blast injury); blunt 
trauma from bodily displacement; and penetrating 
wounds from ballistic objects. Building collapse can 
also cause crush trauma to many casualties at once. 
Explosions and fires in civilian settings may be caused 
by intentional means (eg, arson or improvised explosive devices [IEDs]) or unintentionally (eg, vehicular 
crashes, industrial accidents, or faulty electrical wiring). They may also be caused by natural sources (eg, 
lightning strikes that initiate wildfires). Explosions in 
confined spaces or involving structural collapse are 
associated with greater morbidity and mortality. 16 
Building collapse leads to inhalation injuries, crush 
injuries, and higher fracture rates in survivors. 16,17 
Many circumstances determine casualty numbers 
in conventional explosions, including confined space 
versus outdoors, size of the explosive charge, proximity of victims to the explosion, and presence of intervening barriers or body armor. 18 The most prevalent 
post-blast injuries among survivors are multimodal 
trauma, often with occult internal injuries due to the 
effects of blast overpressure. Explosive injuries tend to 
507
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
simultaneously affect multiple body regions and organ 
systems. Blast-related injury patterns include burns, 
retained foreign bodies, barotrauma, amputations, and 
traumatic brain injury, among others. 19 
MCIs that occur at mass gatherings have been associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality. 20 
Mass gatherings pose several logistical problems for 
responders, including high crowd density, crowd control, restricted points of entry and movement, difficult 
access to victims, low security-to-medical personnel 
ratios, poor fire safety measures, and limited on-site 
medical care. 21 From 1982 to 2012, 290 mass gathering 
MCIs were reported, with multiple etiologies and 
resultant injury mechanisms. The majority (55. 9%) of 
these MCIs involved the movement of people under 
crowded conditions, leading to stampede. Special 
hazards such as airplane mishaps, vehicular crashes, 
and pyrotechnic displays occurred in 19. 6%. These 
categories of injuries were followed in frequency 
by structural failures (13. 1%), intentional manmade 
events (9%), and toxic exposures (2. 4%). 22
Myriad other accidental and natural events cause 
trauma as well, but not all MCIs involve trauma. 
Healthcare systems must be prepared for disease epidemics and the potential consequences of HAZMAT 
or CBR exposures. Equipment resources could be 
severely stretched if hundreds of victims in one area 
required mechanical ventilation after an intentional 
release of an organophosphate chemical or botulinum 
toxin. The same might be true following accidental 
release of a corrosive gas.
Epidemics and pandemics often develop slowly 
relative to other natural and manmade MCIs. Over 
the course of time, however, they can consume enormous amounts of resources, and finding solutions in 
the forms of antimicrobial prophylaxis and treatments 
for emerging pathogens, particularly when developing 
new vaccines, can be a lengthy process. CHEs are often 
initiated by drought or other reasons for population 
displacements, but MCIs on smaller scales may occur 
in multiple locations with epidemics in temporary 
camps or interpersonal violence in fights for scarce 
survival resources. 23 
Events affecting large geographical areas might 
cause a variety of effects. Winter storms generate 
cold injuries and hypothermia, and also often lead 
to increased numbers of motor vehicle crashes, falls, 
power-tool injuries, carbon monoxide exposures, 
dehydration (if access to water is prevented for days), 
and exacerbations of chronic illnesses due to degraded 
access to necessary healthcare services and prescription refills. 24 
How the severity of illnesses or injuries is distributed throughout the casualty population affects 
the resource burden at any one location within the 
responding system. Some event types typically generate more severe injuries than others. For example, the 
majority of initial survivors from explosions in open 
areas are often discharged from emergency departments,19 whereas explosions inside commuter buses or 
trains usually generate a higher proportion of critical 
or severely injured casualties. 25–27 Building collapses 
often increase the number of immediate fatalities,2 
but extrications over an extended period of time will 
decrease the rate of patient encounters.
The location of the event is an important consideration in both planning and response, which are critically dependent on the capacity and capabilities of the 
medical infrastructure and the prevailing standard of 
care acceptable to the population impacted. The level 
of care deemed appropriate within one culture may 
not be the same as within another culture. Americans 
generally expect a high level of care available to all, and 
persons in countries with socialized healthcare may 
expect some rationing of resources during the course 
of even normal operations. Those from impoverished 
nations may not expect much, and may prefer alternative approaches to healthcare not typically available 
from the US military operating in their country.
MCIs may occur in any setting: motor vehicle 
crashes, aircraft or shipboard mishaps, combat operations, or in military support of civilian communities 
(domestic or international settings). Geographical 
distribution of casualties may range from concentrated 
clusters of survivors in an ASE14,15 to widespread areas 
in an earthquake. 28,29 Medical response to MCIs may 
occur during deployments in urban or geographically 
isolated settings. Military medical assets may be prestaged in anticipation of combat-related casualties in 
conflicts around the world or called upon to augment 
or fill an MCI response capability in non-combat scenarios as events dictate. Military assets must also be 
ready to participate in a community response while 
at home station. 
GARRISON PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
Permanent military bases, particularly in the United 
States, are integral to the communities surrounding 
them. Military personnel and their families often live 
off base and civilians commonly work on base. Many 
military bases are small cities in themselves, and their 
approach to emergency management should mirror 
that of other governmental organizations. According to 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), 
508
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
“Emergency management is the managerial function 
charged with creating the framework within which 
communities reduce vulnerability to hazards and cope 
with disasters [and] protects communities by coordinating and integrating all activities necessary to build, 
sustain, and improve the capability to mitigate against, 
prepare for, respond to, and recover from threatened 
or actual natural disasters, acts of terrorism, or other 
man-made disasters.”30 Emergency management is a 
multidisciplinary function operating within the National Response Framework (essentially the country’s 
disaster plan, in which authorities, responsibilities, 
and functions of agencies at all levels are delineated). 31 
FEMA has outlined the following eight principles of 
emergency management:
1. Comprehensive: emergency managers consider 
and take into account all hazards, all phases, all 
stakeholders, and all impacts relevant to disasters. 
2. Progressive: emergency managers anticipate future disasters and take preventive and preparatory 
measures to build disaster-resistant and disasterresilient communities. 
3. Risk-driven: emergency managers use sound risk 
management principles (hazard identification, risk 
analysis, and impact analysis) in assigning priorities and resources. 
4. Integrated: emergency managers ensure unity of 
effort among all levels of government and all elements of a community. 
5. Collaborative: emergency managers create and 
sustain broad and sincere relationships among 
individuals and organizations to encourage trust, 
advocate a team atmosphere, build consensus, and 
facilitate communication. 
6. Coordinated: emergency managers synchronize 
the activities of all relevant stakeholders to achieve 
a common purpose. 
7. Flexible: emergency managers use creative and 
innovative approaches in solving disaster challenges. 
8. Professional: emergency managers value a science 
and knowledge-based approach based on education, training, experience, ethical practice, public 
stewardship, and continuous improvement. 30
Emergency Management Cycle
Establishing comprehensive general and MCI 
response programs involves hazard vulnerability assessments, which identify pre-event risks and mitigating factors for reasonably foreseeable disasters, and 
estimate the associated seriousness of the potential 
impact of such events on the population and infrastructure. Operational planning for MCIs is optimally 
predetermined and deliberate, with an “all-hazards 
approach” across all phases of the emergency management cycle: mitigation, preparedness, response, 
and recovery (Figure 34-1). This includes developing 
contingency plans for provisioning, staffing, and 
training MCI response teams, as well as establishing 
interagency relationships before urgent or emergent 
needs arise. Scenario-based training should be added 
where setting-specific disasters might occur (eg, 
coastal areas should prepare more for hurricanes 
and tsunamis, some inland regions flood more than 
others, certain areas are more prone to earthquakes, 
and many people live close to industrial sites). 32 
While these preparations ideally should occur prior 
to deployment in a crisis, expedient “just-in-time” 
training may be required for unprepared responding personnel. 
Notification of the need for an MCI response can 
come with “some warning” or as a “no warning” 
request for assistance. “Some warning” may occur 
when an event and its effects can be anticipated, 
such as in the case of hurricane landfall predictions 
with likely flooding and possible epidemics. “No 
warning” may occur in earthquakes or terrorist 
attacks. 33 In some circumstances, preparation and 
predeployment of medical assets may be staged in 
or near a region anticipating a natural event, if there 
is sufficient deployment time before and protection 
of those assets as the event unfolds. Organizers of 
prearranged mass gatherings should always prepare 
and exercise primary, alternate, contingency, and 
emergency response plans. 34 
The mitigation phase focuses on eliminating or 
lessening the impact of disaster-related events and 
subsequent complications that may result. Factors influencing disaster mitigation include capability of local 
and regional assets along with medical system resilience to the types of events that could be encountered. 
Mitigation effectiveness depends on the availability of 
information on potential hazards, impact risks, and 
existing or obtainable countermeasures. 
The mitigation phase includes long-term policies, 
programs, and activities designed to anticipate and reduce the adverse effects of unavoidable natural disasters, predictable accidents, and even some intentional 
events. One example of a casualty mitigation effort is 
a community evacuation policy for hurricane-prone 
locations. Another method for mitigating disaster impact on response capacity is establishing memoranda 
of agreement or understanding between nongovernmental organizations and governmental agencies to 
provide mutual aid or supporting functions in the 
event of disasters. 35 
The medical objective for the preparedness phase 
is to have local governments, civil agencies, and individuals create plans to enhance emergency manage509
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
ment operations. These plans are used to develop a 
constant level of readiness and MCI-response capability via multidisciplinary and interagency collaboration. 
Medical preparedness measures include training in the 
incident command system (ICS), updating mutual-aid 
agreements, operational planning with equipment 
checks and supply inventories, refamiliarization 
with communications systems, practicing emergency 
personnel-recall procedures, and conducting exercises 
to practice casualty care and patient tracking. Having 
appropriate response mechanisms, procedures, training, and logistical support in place before an event 
enhances the ability for medical personnel to respond 
as effectively as possible to any emergency situation. These measures can be described as operational 
readiness to deal with disasters; this readiness can be 
enhanced by rehearsals, developing long-range and 
short-range strategies, and building early warning 
methods to protect the population at risk and activate 
response teams. 
Preparedness also involves ensuring that strategic 
caches of equipment, medical supplies, and other essential items are maintained for regional catastrophe 
response. Pre-staged equipment near high-risk areas 
decreases the lift requirements for medical assets 
responding from outside the affected area. In addition, pre-identified alternative insertion locations 
and backup care and staging areas provide options 
in case primary medical treatment sites are rendered 
unusable. 
If the necessary preparations have not been made, 
the responding medical team is unlikely to effectively 
meet the immediate needs of the affected population. 
Personnel who do not conduct prehospital response 
as part of their normal duties should seek training 
such as the Prehospital Trauma Life Support course. 36 
Communities likely to be affected could also be 
trained in programs such as basic first aid and Stop 
the Bleed. 37 Specialized training may also be required 
for interagency operations, such as medical support 
of law enforcement in ASEs, as well as other agency 
contingent roles or functions. 
The aim of MCI response is to provide immediate support to reduce morbidity and mortality in the 
Figure 34-1. Emergency management cycle.
ICS: incident command system; MCI: mass casualty incident; PHTLS: Prehospital Trauma Life Support; TCCC: Tactical 
Combat Casualty Care
• MCI response team
 training
• Casualty management
 (PHTLS/TCCC)
• Exercises and drills
Preparedness
• Mobilization
• Liaison with ICS/responders
• Crisis
 communications/media
 management
• Triage and medical
 casualty management
• Family reunification
Response
• Medical services
 support to
 community/transition
• Demobilization
• Debriefing/stress
 incident debriefing
• After action
 reports/lessons
 identified
Recovery
• Executive support
• Risk/vulnerability
 assessments
• Develop medical
 system resiliency
• Development of
 operational policies,
 plans and procedures 
Mitigation
510
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
affected population. This is accomplished by providing emergency services including search and rescue, 
extrication, extraction, stabilization, and evacuation 
of casualties until more permanent and sustainable 
solutions can be realized. The response phase focuses 
on immediate civilian-community or military-garrison 
actions, which, almost by definition, must occur using 
functional resources from the affected region. Local 
resources may be subsequently augmented by governmental, nongovernmental, or ad hoc volunteer teams 
pre-staged or deploying from a distance. All agencies 
must be able to respond effectively with experienced 
leaders and trained personnel, deploy quickly with 
adequate means of conveyance and logistical support, 
and possess appropriate interagency communication 
systems, optimally having rehearsed procedures for 
emergency settings. 
In addition to potential casualties directly generated by an event, patients with exacerbations of 
chronic medical conditions may present seeking care 
in large numbers. Community infrastructure may 
be significantly impacted by a disaster through loss 
of healthcare access, public health services, or basic 
utilities, and patients with chronic medical conditions 
may decompensate due to loss of medications or require services such as outpatient dialysis or oxygen 
therapy. 38 Gaps in a locally impacted health system 
may be filled by dedicated teams, including relief of 
local medical staff, augmentation of local medical 
facilities for surge capacity, dissemination of provisions, mass prophylaxis or immunization programs, 
establishment of preventive health measures, and 
medical support of responders deployed away from 
their home bases. During these activities, important 
considerations include how working conditions, such 
as sanitation, cold or heat stress, dehydration, and 
psychological stress, may affect responder health. 
Addressing these issues will decrease the likelihood 
of adverse effects on team members and consequent 
loss of manpower.
The recovery phase focuses on rebuilding and 
restoring the affected community. Recovery begins 
right after the emergency, and recovery activities may 
occur concurrently with response efforts. The recovery 
phase’s duration depends on community resilience, 
remaining infrastructure, and extent of additional 
resources brought into the region. Medical response 
teams may transition operations to temporarily support the affected community until return of local 
medical system functionalities. After action reports 
(AARs) are compiled during the recovery phase to 
help improve processes and team performance for 
subsequent operations. These activities then loop back 
to the mitigation phase.
Incident Command System 
An ICS is a standardized incident management 
concept of command and control that allows an integrated organizational structure across agency and 
jurisdictional boundaries. The basis for the ICS was 
developed in the 1970s following a series of devastating California wildfires. AARs from these events 
assessed that outcomes were suboptimal due to unnecessary duplication of constrained resources, lack 
of standardized communication between responding 
agencies, ineffective tactics, and inadequate coordination of efforts. 39 
MCI response missions are coordinated through 
common ICS principles, which provide a unified command structure and a response framework that is not 
specific to the disaster type, location, or scope. This 
“all-hazards approach” is best employed in operations 
where multiple governmental and nongovernmental 
agencies interact concurrently in the same setting. 39 
Tactical field collaborations occur more efficiently 
within an ICS. Personnel from different organizations 
are integrated in defined functional roles regardless 
of an individual’s rank within an individual agency. 
Positional authority may be granted to personnel with 
the appropriate skill requirements to meet mission 
objectives. An ICS provides the flexibility to rapidly activate and establish an organizational structure around 
needed MCI response functions. 
The ICS organizational structure is developed in a 
modular fashion based on the nature and size of an 
incident, from a localized to a regional, multijurisdictional response. The specific structure established for 
any MCI is based on management needs and personnel 
available to fill functional sections or positions, such as 
command, operations, planning, logistics, and administration or finance (Figure 34-2). The organization’s 
configuration is assembled under the authority of the 
incident commander, who should be the most qualified and appropriate person as the situation dictates. 
The operations section directs all tactical response to 
achieve incident objectives. The planning section is 
responsible for collecting, evaluating, documenting, 
and synthesizing information to produce actionable 
plans. The logistics section is responsible for obtaining, 
maintaining, and accounting for essential personnel, 
equipment, and supplies. It is also responsible for 
support services such as facilities, transportation, communications, food, and medical services for incident 
responders. The finance or administration section 
is responsible for funding operations, cost analysis, 
contract negotiation, and timekeeping. 
Medical operations are generally assigned to the 
operations or logistics section under the ICS frame511
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
Figure 34-2. Incident command system functional structure.
Coordinates support
activities for
incident planning,
contingency operations,
long range, and
demobilization.
Supports coordination
and processing of
incident information.
PLANNING
Supports Command
and Operations in
acquisition and
use of personnel,
supplies and
equipment.
LOGISTICS
 Establishes strategy
and tactics
to accomplish
mission objectives.
Coordinates and
executes
the strategy
and tactics.
OPERATIONS
 Defines incident goals
and
operational period objectives.
Includes
Incident Commander,
Safety Officer,
Public Information Officer,
Senior Liaison Officer.
COMMAND
Other Senior Advisers
ADMINISTRATION/
FINANCE
Provides
administrative and
financial support
to Command and Operations.
work. The primary mission of medical responders 
is to deliver efficient care to the largest number of 
victims possible. If focus strays from mission-critical 
functions, tactical response efforts may be diffused 
or duplicated at the scene. Having personnel use an 
ICS event checklist or job-action sheet (Exhibit 34-1) 
ensures a frame of reference to guide response efforts 
within a unified command structure. 
DEPLOYED ROLES FOR JOINT HEALTH SERVICES 
When healthcare infrastructure and personnel must 
be brought with deploying forces and set up in countries where insufficient or inadequate resources exist 
locally, military doctrine dictates a tiered system to 
manage casualties at any point of injury (POI) through 
a global system of en-route care and interval stops at 
mobile or fixed locations, each fulfilling various roles 
in the continuous management of casualties. Deployed 
military medical capability is designated in four roles 
(formerly called “echelons”) of care capabilities40 
(Chapter 14, Introduction to Health Service Support, 
has a detailed description of the medical roles of care 
in these settings). En-route care includes care rendered 
as casualties are moved from POI to definitive care.
Role 1 medical response generally consists of embedded individual or team medical assets within military units who stabilize casualties at the POI and move 
them to designated casualty collection points (CCPs). 
Medical supplies are limited at Role 1 and there is no 
capacity for holding patients, so casualties must be 
evacuated for further care via ground, air, or water 
assets as soon as possible. Particularly in Afghanistan, 
evacuation by air was more commonly employed due 
to distances and terrain involved and the risks from 
IEDs on ground evacuation routes. 
To augment Role 1 near the POI, Role 2 capability is 
commonly delivered by medical assets that are mobile 
enough to be moved periodically to match operational requirements. These platforms are modular and 
typically include emergency medical resuscitation and 
surgical intervention assets. Role 2 Light Maneuver 
teams or units provide advanced medical capabilities 
where they can be rapidly accessible or deployable 
with short notification. Limitations of Role 2 staging 
locations include potential mismatching of resources 
in asymmetric warfare settings and denied environ512
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 34-1
JOB ACTION SHEET EXAMPLE 
EMERGENCY PLAN 
Operations Section 
Job Action Sheet 
Medical Services Subsection 
Triage Unit Leader 
TRIAGE UNIT LEADER 
Positioned Assigned To: ___________________________________ 
You Report To: __________________________________(Treatment Areas Supervisor) 
Operations Command Center: ______________________ Telephone: _________________ 
Mission: Sort casualties according to priority of injuries, and assure their disposition to the proper treatment area. 
Immediate
◻ Receive appointment from Treatment Areas Supervisor. 
◻ Read this entire Job Action Sheet and review organizational chart on back. 
◻ Put on position identification name badge. 
◻ Receive briefing from Treatment Areas Supervisor with other Treatment Area unit leaders. 
◻ Establish patient Triage Area; consult with Transportation Unit Leader to designate the ambulance offloading area. 
◻ Ensure sufficient transport equipment and personnel for Triage Area. 
◻ Assess problem, triage-treatment needs relative to specific incident. 
◻ Assist the Patient Areas Supervisor with triage of casualties, if requested by Treatment Areas Supervisor. 
◻ Develop action plan, request needed resources from Treatment Areas Supervisor. 
◻ Assign triage teams. 
Intermediate
◻ Identify location of Immediate, Delayed, Minor Treatment, Discharge and Morgue areas; coordinate with 
Treatment Areas Supervisor. 
◻ Contact Safety & Security Officer about security and traffic flow needs in the Triage Area. Inform Treatment 
Areas Supervisor of action. 
Extended
◻ Report emergency care equipment needs to Materials Supply Unit Leader. Inform Treatment Areas Supervisor of action. 
◻ Ensure that the disaster chart and admission forms are utilized. Request documentation/clerical personnel 
from Labor Pool if necessary. 
◻ Keep Treatment Areas Supervisor apprised of status, number of injured in the Triage Area or expected to 
arrive there. 
◻ Observe and assist any staff who exhibit signs of stress and fatigue. Report concerns to Treatment Areas 
Supervisor. Provide for staff rest periods and relief. 
◻ Review and approve the area documenter’s recordings of actions/decisions in the Triage Area. Send copy to 
the Treatment Areas Supervisor. 
◻ Direct non-utilized personnel to Labor Pool. 
◻ Other concerns:
513
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
ments, where injuries occur in unexpected locations 
outside the “reach” of air assets, creating redundancy 
when assets are placed in close proximity to each other, 
resulting in overflying of some locations, and creating 
security risks if enemy forces attack these positions. 
Role 3 medical treatment facilities (MTFs) are relatively fixed in position, and are similar to stateside 
hospitals with more resources and capability to manage the demands of MCIs than even Role 2 Enhanced 
facilities. Resources at Role 3 typically include teams 
of providers, often enough to work shifts; specialized providers and support personnel; and greater 
availability of blood products, advanced diagnostic 
imaging, and laboratory assets. Additional capabilities 
may include neurosurgery, vascular surgery, or other 
surgical specialties. 
Role 4 MTFs provide definitive care with resources 
such as medical and surgical subspecialties, rehabilitation, and prosthetics. These facilities are generally 
outside of theater boundaries and provide support to 
the population at risk on an area basis subject to the 
limitations of evacuation assets to reach the facility. 
Role 4 care is typically found in large overseas MTFs 
(eg, Landstuhl Regional Medical Center) and USbased hospitals and medical centers. Distribution of 
extraordinary casualty numbers to appropriate facilities throughout the United States—whether the need 
arises from a domestic disaster or combat casualties 
returning from overseas—may be managed through 
the National Disaster Medical System, which is the 
administrative system under the US Department of 
Health and Human Services (DHHS) for coordination of resources across jurisdictions throughout the 
United States. 41
Despite the tiered structure of deployed capabilities, 
casualties do not necessarily flow through the four 
roles in a sequential manner. For example, some 
casualties may be evacuated directly from the POI 
to a Role 3 facility, or from a Role 2 forward surgical 
capability directly to a Role 4 hospital to begin more 
definitive care.
None of the roles provide every service a casualty 
might require, and none possess unlimited surge capacity. Therefore, medical personnel should be aware 
of local medical resources and engage with host nation 
hospitals in the area whenever available and politically feasible. Regardless of whether deployment occurs overseas or in the United States, conducting site 
surveys, establishing interpersonal relationships, and 
preparing written working agreements with medical 
facilities for specialty care and surge overflow incorporates these resources into medical contingency plans, 
and thereby establishes a regional capability regardless 
of country. 
Defense Support to Civil Authorities 
Stark contrasts may be seen in the response capability of different communities. Industrial nations with 
robust EMS and healthcare systems may be able to 
absorb and effectively treat significant numbers of 
casualties; however, rural or low-income locales may 
not have adequate health system infrastructure to deal 
with critical conditions or any significant volume of 
casualties. 
The United States has a tiered domestic disaster 
response, with local efforts committed first until resources are exceeded. Requests for state aid are then 
made to support local efforts. When local and state 
efforts are overwhelmed, the federal government 
may be asked for national-level assistance. Once a 
declaration of federal disaster is made, the president 
of the United States may task the DHHS, the Department of Defense (DoD), or both to provide domestic 
assistance to local and state assets. When the DoD 
provides this support, it is known as defense support 
to civil authorities. 42,43 The DoD may also provide 
specialized support capabilities such as CBR, nuclear, 
or high-yield explosive disaster response. Examples 
of DoD domestic disaster response include assistance 
to Colorado in 2013 for flooding, to the mid-Atlantic 
and northeastern United States in 2012 for Superstorm Sandy, to Kansas in 2007 after a tornado struck 
Greensburg, and to the Gulf Coast in 2005 for Hurricane Katrina. 
Unique or robust support commonly provided by 
the military includes transportation, logistics, communications, and rapidly deployable medical care. 
Transportation and logistical support is often the key 
capability needed in an area affected by a disaster, 
either because local or regional assets were disabled 
or destroyed, or because sufficient resources were not 
present even before the event. 9 Due to a constant state 
of readiness, military transportation assets and logistical support can be provided relatively quickly once 
approvals flow down from the National Command 
Authority (ie, the president of the United States and 
the secretary of defense), but approval and mobilization commonly takes 3 to 4 days.
Disasters may drastically impact communication 
infrastructure in an affected community by damaging wireless or radio towers, causing sustained power 
outages, and overwhelming networks burdened with 
too many users. Devastation of the communications 
infrastructure leaves responding agencies and local 
populations unable to dispatch medical resources, coordinate resource allocation, or relay critical updates. 44 
Embedding self-contained communications capability 
with deployed units addresses these gaps. Intact com514
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
munications allow for timely incident system status assessments to be used for initial and subsequent reports 
from the scene. These updates provide situational 
awareness to decision-makers. Status updates may 
also provide alerts to impacted citizens to guide them 
to temporary medical facilities, shelters, or evacuation 
destinations. 45 Military communications technology is 
some of the best in the world, and has the advantage 
of being designed for use in austere and harsh environments, so it is often helpful to regions with poor 
infrastructure or degraded capability.
US medical, surgical, and public health assistance 
can be deployed using a variety of teams from the 
DHHS or the DoD, but consideration must be given 
to what will be needed when. For instance, following 
an earthquake, a region may have a pressing need for 
acute trauma care when the request for US assistance 
is made, but that requirement will decrease over time 
as casualties are either saved or die. By the time trauma 
teams arrive 4 or more days after the event, they may 
no longer be needed.
Foreign Humanitarian Assistance 
DoD assets may be used in support of foreign disaster relief operations when the following three criteria 
have been met: the military provides a unique service, 
international civilian capacity is overwhelmed, and 
the host nation requests assistance. DoD components 
provide disaster assistance under presidential directive 
when the secretary of state requests assistance to support another federal agency, or in emergency situations 
in order to prevent loss of life. 46,47 Recent examples of 
DoD international disaster assistance include deployments to Southeast Asia in 2013 for Operation Damayan after Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda) impacted the 
region, to Japan in 2011 for Operation Tomodachi after 
a magnitude 9. 0 earthquake and subsequent tsunami, 
and to Haiti in 2010 for Operation Unified Response 
following a magnitude 7. 0 earthquake. 
Noncombat illnesses and injuries depend on the 
nature of the event. Injuries may include penetrating, 
blast, blunt, thermal, crush, or immersion injuries —or 
combinations of these. Physical injury represents the 
major cause of mortality and morbidity for larger 
MCIs, though secondary morbidity results from public 
health impacts. 40,48–51
Natural disasters can have an especially devastating effect on the population. An annual average of 21 
earthquakes over the last 30 years have resulted in a 
request for international assistance or a declaration 
of a state of emergency. Many factors in addition to 
earthquake magnitude influence the MCI casualty 
distribution. These include the time of the day the 
event occurred, distance of the population from the 
epicenter, secondary events triggered by the earthquake, urbanization grade, building standards and 
regulations, and access to medical care. 28 Death tolls 
from major earthquakes range from fewer than five 
to nearly a quarter million. 51 
The majority of conditions in casualties presenting in the first 3 days of an earthquake are due to 
trauma such as lacerations and musculoskeletal injuries. Crush injuries and subsequent complications 
pose significant additional challenges for medical 
management in austere conditions. In addition to 
acute renal failure, multiple organ systems can be 
affected. Complications from crush injuries include 
compartment syndromes, electrolyte abnormalities, arrhythmias, hypovolemic shock, sepsis, acute 
respiratory distress syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and cardiac failure. 52 After 
this acute injury period, the majority of care shifts 
to a nontrauma profile with a sustained increase in 
demand for medical services lasting at least 10 days 
following the earthquake. 52
From 1980 to 2000, an average of 11,800 deaths 
per year were attributed to cyclones (hurricanes or 
typhoons). The average number of cyclone effects on 
individual nations was 46 per year, with many of these 
storm systems affecting multiple nations. Conversely, 
several nations experience multiple storms each year. 
For example, in 2004, the United States was struck by 
five hurricanes, four of which made landfall in the 
state of Florida. A less recent but massive cyclone in 
1991 killed about 150,000 people in Bangladesh alone. 53 
Secondary weather effects from cyclones include 
flooding (storm surges), landslides, and tornados. 
Minor injuries including lacerations, blunt trauma, and 
puncture wounds are common with cyclone-related 
incidents, and 80% of these injuries are restricted to 
lower extremities. 38 
CHEs may be created by US military combat operations, when collateral damage dramatically impacts 
large civilian populations. On the other hand, most 
civilian morbidity and mortality during CHEs is due 
to potentially preventable infectious diseases, malnutrition, and interpersonal violence. 54,55 Impacted 
civilians may present for care during or immediately 
after combat operations.
Combat Operation Injury Patterns
Modern combat operations have transitioned from 
massive armies facing off with defined front lines to 
asymmetric warfare amid low-density, nonlinear, 
remote, disbursed operations (eg, Afghanistan) and 
complex urban conflicts (eg, Mogadishu). 56 Smaller 
515
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
conflict sizes have resulted in fewer overall US and coalition casualties, but substantial losses have occurred 
among the units actually engaged. 56 
Damage sustained depends on the mechanism of injury in each case. Recent rates for wound locations are 
head (8%), eyes (6%), ears (3%), face (10%), neck (3%), 
thorax (6%), abdomen (11%), and extremities (54%). 57 
Injuries resulting from exsanguinating hemorrhage 
are often immediately lethal, and thus may benefit 
from rapid and effective intervention, but up to 50% of 
these casualties may die without immediate treatment. 
Approximately 20% of deaths from hemorrhage occur 
from injuries in body areas where the bleeding might 
have been controlled by simple direct pressure. 56–58 
Attention and direction of line commanders in mitigating this risk to forces has been demonstrated to be 
effective when implemented consistently throughout 
a combat unit. 59 
Peacekeeping operations have an estimated mean 
wounded-in-action rate of 3. 16 per 1,000 troops per 
year. The estimated wounded-in-action rate for individual operations ranged from 0. 49 to 12. 50. In 188 
casualty-generating incidents examined, an average of 
3. 8 troops were wounded and 0. 86 killed. 59 The widespread use of enhanced vehicular shielding and individual body armor has subsequently led to increased 
survival from combat-related injuries. Nonetheless, 
protection of the head and torso has increased the 
proportion of extremity injuries, which have recently 
been described as comprising approximately 50% of 
all combat wounds. 60,61
Combat-related injury patterns have changed over 
the last century, with an increased trend of injuries 
due to explosives compared to those caused by smallarms fire. 62–65 In World War I, for example, 65% of all 
recorded combat casualties resulted from gunshots. 61 
This decreased to 35% during the Vietnam conflict,62 
and recent estimates of casualties from direct-fire 
weapons in the Iraq and Afghanistan theaters are 
16% to 23%. 57,60 On the other hand, IEDs have been 
used with great effectiveness, and have increased in 
sophistication in both combat and noncombat settings. 
Recent estimates for combat-related MCIs caused by 
IEDs are approximately 18% of all treated casualties. 61 
Traumatic amputations and penetrating extremity trauma following explosions may cause massive 
hemorrhaging, but on-scene application of single or 
multiple tourniquets by the casualty or a buddy has 
increased survival rates. 58 See Chapter 35, Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive 
Threats, for further details on conventional combatrelated injury patterns.
Overwhelming numbers of casualty estimates (> 
500,000) are projected in nuclear conflicts. Even single 
improvised nuclear devices in one location would 
cause a very high-magnitude MASCAL situation and 
likely disrupt the responding medical infrastructure 
at the same time. 66 Modeling of a range of scenarios 
has been completed, with various nuclear detonation yields (0. 1–10 kilotons), heights of burst (ground 
and air), and weather conditions in several major US 
cities. 67 Nuclear or radiological devices cause injury 
through blast, thermal, light, and ionizing radiation 
effects. Potential for significant radiation exposure may 
exist with little or no evidence of physical trauma. 66 
Radiological effects are determined by exposure time, 
distance from source, and any shielding that may have 
been present. 67 
UNIVERSAL MASS CASUALTY PRINCIPLES
The effects of trauma-causing MCIs occur in a 
trimodal distribution. The initial phase occurs with 
onset of the event or immediately afterward and is 
characterized by high mortality rates due to injuries. 
In the minutes to hours after onset, the second phase 
entails early trauma management. During the first 24hour period, most fatalities occur and the majority of 
casualties are recovered. Medical care may be limited 
to on-scene stabilization at or near the POI for casualty 
management. In these circumstances, a greater emphasis is placed on the rapid evacuation of casualties 
to designated temporary staging areas or definitive 
treatment facilities. In the third phase, days to weeks 
after the disaster, efforts are directed at treating injury 
complications (eg, sepsis, multiple organ failure, and 
psychological problems). Having to move casualties 
long distances out of an affected area, either because 
the local system is overwhelmed or other facilities are 
more capable, can have an effect on these patterns. 68
Regardless of the nature of the event, casualties presenting during MCIs surpass ordinary medical system 
capacity and require coordinated efforts to sort and 
prioritize available resources to meet the needs of as 
many casualties as possible. Based on the magnitude 
of the MCI, “minimum acceptable care” principles may 
apply. Austere conditions are said to exist when medical personnel, supplies, or equipment are limited, or 
when adverse conditions impact the ability to provide 
“normal care” to casualties. 68 Successful critical-care 
stabilization has been demonstrated in military and 
civilian operations with careful management of limited 
or constrained resources through planning, rehearsals, and continuous reevaluation; using equipment 
and supplies appropriate for each situation; leverag516
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
ing evacuation assets in terms of type, timing, and 
transportation destinations; and employing the right 
people with the right skills at the right time across the 
complete continuity of care. 69 
MCI response first occurs at the local level and relies 
on unaffected medical assets at or near the scene. The 
remaining functional infrastructure becomes the initial 
part of the regional medical system of care for the MCI. 
Local medical resources may be severely impacted 
by the disaster through loss of hospital or emergency 
services staff, equipment, or hospital-based facilities. 
Once conventional capacity is exceeded, a number of 
factors influence the level of response to MCIs. These 
include well-developed plans, remaining functional infrastructure, operational resource allocation, effective 
triage, accessible staging areas, organizational communication, and clear chain of command. Coordination 
of medical response among personnel and facilities 
depends on the physical location of affected areas and 
distance to staging areas or medical facilities. External 
teams can deploy in an attempt to fill functional and 
logistical gaps in care delivery. 
A tactical approach for MCI management includes 
a well-considered plan (Exhibit 34-2) and preestablished practices to provide interim medical services 
to an impacted healthcare system through resource 
deployment, field care principles, and designated 
medical facility reception. This approach includes 
specially trained responders and links field operations with medical facilities through an overall ICS 
structure. Assumptions for optimal MCI management 
include an effective triage process, field stabilization, 
and viable evacuation routes with ample transportation assets. However, this approach is based on the 
availability of sizable amounts of resources accessible 
or obtainable in a timeframe that will affect outcomes. 
Constrained resources will likely result in degraded 
system performance. In such situations, MCI tactics 
should be adapted to best meet specific situational 
needs. Duplicating or obstructing services through 
poorly coordinated efforts is a risk when deployed 
teams lack situational awareness on the ground. 
Situational awareness involves consideration of 
mission objectives and rules of engagement. Other 
considerations include security issues from possible 
enemy activity or other threats to responders (eg, 
secondary IEDs, fire or flood, unstable structure) and 
number of personnel available plus knowledge of their 
individual and collective skill sets. Terrain, weather, 
time of day, time available to accomplish the mission 
while maximizing casualty outcomes, and the effects 
on the local civilian population (and the effects from 
civilians on the ability to deliver care) are also important factors. Estimates of the resources that will likely 
be required; known need for specialty resources (eg, 
decontamination teams); and the possibility of cascading events or new incidents in separate locations are 
just a few of the many considerations for responders.
Scene Management
A rapid situational analysis defines the circumstances of the MCI, and is paramount to guiding responders. 
This “rapid needs assessment” is critical to avoiding 
a “ready–fire–aim” approach. It establishes a baseline 
for decision-making and resource allocation (Exhibit 
34-3). Responder team safety is a primary concern to 
preserve mission capability. MCI scenes will likely be 
chaotic, with normal operations disrupted. Effective 
responses require a systematic approach to deal with 
rapidly changing situations. Situations may become 
unstable at any time, posing new threats to responders. 
Dangers depend on the cause of the disaster and range 
from manmade security threats to environmental 
threats. Security threats may involve advancing hostile forces, an active shooter, or secondary explosive 
devices. Moreover, civil unrest often accompanies 
societal instability, leading to looting and violence as 
EXHIBIT 34-2
MASS CASUALTY INCIDENT PLANNING CHECKLIST
 
• Does MCI plan cover the tasks and responsibilities of all the organizations and personnel likely to be involved 
in the response?
 
• Is staff familiar with implementation of the MCI plan?
 
• Do involved organizations and personnel have an ongoing, mandatory MCI training program?
 
• Has the MCI plan been validated for expected type and volume of casualties? How?
 
• Are MCI responder tasks assigned in terms of positions rather than individuals?
MCI: mass casualty incident
517
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
EXHIBIT 34-3
MASS CASUALTY INCIDENT RAPID SITUATIONAL ASSESSMENT
 
• Determine the magnitude of the disaster or MCI response mission.
 
• Establish priorities and objectives for action.
 
• Evaluate the capacity of the local response (including resources and logistics).
 
• Determine external resource needs and prioritize actions.
 
• Plan execution of mission objectives (duration, scope, exit strategy etc). 
 
• Know your role.
MCI: mass casualty incident
secondary security concerns. 70 Acute environmental 
threats include unstable building structures, hazardous materials or smoke exposure, potentially injurious 
debris, gas leaks, flooding, downed electrical lines, 
and stray animals, among others. Cascading events 
may lead to explosions, fires, and building collapses. 
Mitigating risks—to the extent possible consistent 
with mission completion requirements—allows personnel to focus on locating casualties and extracting 
them from the POI to a CCP for triage. Many casualties 
may be located in multiple locations with restricted access and possibly obstructed from view, thus requiring 
ad hoc or professional search teams. Securing the location and scene support should occur as soon as feasible 
to prevent secondary casualties among bystanders or 
responders. Deciding between stabilization at the POI 
or rapid victim movement must be balanced with the 
risk assessment of ongoing and potential hazards. 
Support for civil MCI response may be needed 
from volunteers, utility agencies, fire departments, 
law enforcement, local military units, or activation of 
specialty services (eg, urban search and rescue teams). 
Each of these agencies and services augments response 
personnel, secures scene hazards, and brings skills 
to help access casualties safely and expeditiously. 
Availability of these services and trained volunteers 
varies among domestic and international settings. 
In domestic disasters, the DHHS coordinates three 
programs that maintain registries of healthcare volunteers: the Emergency System for Advance Registration of Volunteer Health Professionals,71 the Medical 
Reserve Corps,72 and the NDMS. 73 National Voluntary 
Organizations Active in Disaster74 and the WHO75 are 
resources for international settings. 
Volunteer efforts by individuals or organizations 
pose unique challenges. A rush of volunteers following 
a disaster without overall coordination can overwhelm 
a response system and make the situation worse. 76 
Managing any volunteer response force is difficult, 
due to a variety of backgrounds and lack of experience 
among the volunteers. Additionally, well-meaning but 
untrained volunteers can increase the risks of personal 
injury, general and medical liability, and mission failure. Poorly prepared volunteers may present without 
proper medical screening or appropriate immunizations; with inadequate clothing or equipment; and 
lacking accommodations or shelter, food, and prophylactic medications. 77 These volunteers potentially 
become dangers to themselves or existing casualties 
and can drain limited resources from response efforts. 
Verifying credentials requires significant logistical support in the midst of chaotic situations. Prescreening 
volunteers provides a viable alternative. 76
Rapid Needs Assessment
There is no exclusive set of criteria for initially 
measuring event magnitude and severity because 
every MCI presents a unique set of circumstances. 
Determining what has happened, what the impacts 
are, and what dangers exist is completed during the 
preliminary scene survey (see Exhibit 34-3). This survey should include casualty estimates with cursory 
injury pattern distribution, assessment of transportation assets including viability of access from base to 
scene to treatment destinations, and assessment of the 
functionality of receiving centers. 74 
Casualty estimates serve to guide MCI medical responses, and have been modeled in a number of different scenarios and calculated in real-world experiences. 
Cause, magnitude, and population density allow for 
casualty projections at an affected location. 28,65,78–81 
Casualty estimates for combat-related and noncombatrelated MCI events have changed over time and vary 
with each incident. 
Triage
MCI injuries span the full spectrum of trauma, 
with human effects ranging from expected emotional 
518
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
reactions to severe psychological trauma, and minor 
abrasions to “total body disruption.” The approach to 
acute resuscitation of combat-related versus noncombat-related injuries differs due to the unique aspects of 
combat: high energy and lethality of wounding instruments, multiple concurrent mechanisms of wounding, 
predominance of penetrating injury, persistence of 
threat in tactical settings, austere resource-constrained 
environment, and often delayed access to definitive 
care. 51 However, injury patterns considerably overlap 
in terrorist attacks and combat-related injuries, and 
classifying injury patterns assists in preparation for 
casualty care. A sample of potential injuries that may 
be encountered in MCI scenarios is listed previously 
in the scope and impact sections (although individual 
injury characteristics have been extensively evaluated 
in the literature and detailed descriptions are beyond 
the scope of this chapter). 
Effective MCI management is based on the principles of triage to prioritize treatment or transport 
and allocate resources. Triage systems allow a measure of order in an otherwise tumultuous situation 
in which most factors may be out of the control of 
responders. Internal and external considerations 
influence this sorting process. The restraints of capability, time, and distance to stabilization or definitive care require responders to continuously adjust 
processes based on prevailing conditions. Triage 
may be performed at the POI, at one or more CCPs, 
or at fixed facilities depending on where casualties 
are found or present. 
Less seriously injured persons may or may not 
seek immediate medical evaluation and may leave the 
scene. They may seek their own care at nearby medical facilities or find their own means of conveyance 
to other destinations. These casualties “self-sort” and 
may present as pedestrians, via personal vehicles, or 
on vehicles of opportunity such as buses or trucks. This 
may result in many less severe casualties flooding local 
medical facilities before more severely injured, nonambulatory casualties can be transported from the scene. 
Casualties who are still present at the scene when 
trained personnel arrive may be “globally sorted” by 
instructing all mobile victims to move to a designated 
area. This allows observation of these casualties at one 
location while triage teams sort remaining casualties 
who cannot move under their own power. 
Triage algorithms or protocols are used to assess 
the physiologic status of each casualty. In the United 
States, casualties are traditionally sorted into five 
color-coded categories: immediate (red), delayed 
(yellow), minimal (green), expectant (blue), and deceased (black). The last two categories are by no means 
standardized, and black is sometimes used to identify 
expectant casualties. The term “expectant” is often 
used for casualties responders “expect to die,” thus 
relegating them to comfort care alone when resources 
are limited. A hemodynamically unstable patient with 
penetrating trauma to the head and a Glasgow coma 
score of 3 may be expectant and potentially mortally 
wounded. However, some expectant patients may 
be otherwise classified as immediate if resources are 
available. The authors believe the term should be 
reserved for casualties who responders “expect to 
reevaluate” for the possibility of more aggressive care 
once required resources become available. If resources 
do not become available, and casualties cannot be 
saved, they should remain expectant until they are 
pronounced dead.
Injuries categorized as immediate (red) require 
acute interventions to avoid mortality or further 
morbidity. Injury patterns in this category include 
uncontrolled internal or external hemorrhage, tension pneumothorax, and acute airway compromise, 
as well as threats to eyesight and limb salvage. Procedures for treating an immediate casualty may include 
tourniquets, compression, or hemostatic dressings; 
needle thoracentesis or sealing open pneumothoraces; 
and simple airway interventions such as placing a 
nasopharyngeal airway or rolling casualties into the 
recovery position. 
Delayed (yellow) casualties present with injuries 
in need of intervention, but they are stable or can be 
stabilized until definitive care is available. Examples 
include head and torso injuries for which nothing 
can be done in the field, open fractures, and spinal 
injuries. Medical management for delayed casualties 
may include fluid resuscitation, fracture stabilization, 
analgesic medications, and antibiotic administration 
when indicated. 
Minimal (green) casualties present with injuries that 
are not deemed to threaten life, limb, or eyesight. These 
include minor abrasions, lacerations with controlled 
bleeding, simple dislocations and fractures, and minor 
burns. These casualties can be managed effectively 
with minimal medical care, or they may self-treat, 
thereby bypassing the healthcare system entirely or 
presenting to a primary care location on another day.
A number of protocols can be employed to assist 
the triage process in the prehospital setting and in 
civilian and military hospitals. 82–92 However, evidence 
favoring any particular system is limited; the majority 
of published articles communicate expert opinion only 
or the results of simulations and exercises. Extrapolating outcomes through retrospective analysis of trauma 
registries has also been used to assess various triage 
algorithms, but these findings may be limited because 
most casualties were not injured in MCIs, and even 
519
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
fewer were managed in situations when the standard 
of care had to be adjusted for limited resources. 78 
Widely used MCI triage algorithms include “SALT” 
(sort, assess, lifesaving interventions, and treatment 
and transport)91; “START” (simple triage and rapid 
treatment) for adults84; and “Jump-START” for pediatric patients, which recognizes distinctions between 
adult and pediatric physiology at triage decision points 
(Table 34-1). 85 General principles of out-of-hospital 
triage and treatment, regardless of system used, are 
as follows: 
 
• interventions should be limited to immediate 
life-saving maneuvers, because resuscitation 
TABLE 34-1
COMPARISON OF TRIAGE ALGORITHMS
SALT
Category
START: Adult
Category
JumpSTART: Pediatric
Category
Global Sorting
◻ Still/Obvious life 
threat - assess 1st 
◻ Wave/Purposeful 
movement - assess 
2nd
◻ Walk - assess 3rd 
◻ Walking
Minor
◻ Walking
Minor
◻ No respirations 
after head tilt
Expectant
◻ No respirations/no 
pulse
Expectant
◻ Respirations: 
above 30
Immediate
◻ Respirations: above 45/
below 15
Immediate
Individual Assessment
◻ Life Saving Interventions -Hemorrhage 
control, open airway, 
decompress chest
◻ Perfusion: No 
radial pulse/cap 
refill 2+ sec
Immediate
◻ No respirations with 
peripheral pulse - give 5 
rescue breaths - respirations resume
Immediate
Minor Injuries Only - Yes
Minor
◻ Mental status: 
unable to follow 
simple commands
Immediate
◻ No spontaneous respirations after intervention
Expectant
Minor Injuries Only - No
Delayed
Likely to Survive Given 
Current Resources - Yes
Immediate
Likely to Survive Given 
Current Resources- No
Expectant
◻ Treatment/ Transport
◻ Stable RPM
Delayed
◻ Perfusion: No peripheral pulse/ cap refill 2+ 
sec
Immediate
Immediat
◻ Mental Status: 
AVPU
◻ AV
Delayed
◻ PU
Immediate
RPM: respirations, pulse, and mental status
AVPU: awake, verbal, pain, unresponsive
Data sources: (1) Benson M, Koenig KL, Schultz CH. Disaster triage: START, then SAVE—a new method of dynamic triage for victims of 
catastrophic earthquake. Prehosp Disast Med. 1996;11:117–124. (2) Romig L. Pediatric triage: system to JumpSTART your triage of young 
patients at MCIs. J Emerg Med Serv. 2002;27:52–58,60–53. (3) SALT mass casualty triage: concept endorsed by the American College of 
Emergency Physicians, American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma, American Trauma Society, National Association of EMS 
Physicians, National Disaster Life Support Education Consortium, and State and Territorial Injury Prevention Directors Association. Disaster 
Med Public Health Prep. 2008;2:245–246.
520
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
will consume limited resources and should be 
reserved for salvageable cases; 
 
• patients in shock do not tolerate movement 
well, so resuscitation should be accomplished 
in an ongoing manner before and throughout 
transportation; 
 
• casualties’ conditions may change at any time, 
so they should be reassessed regularly and 
priorities reassigned as indicated; and 
 
• urgent interventions must never be delayed 
by documentation. 
Time is critical in an MCI. Focusing too much on 
treatment during the triage phase limits the number 
of casualties who can be assessed and provided with 
necessary interventions in the field. 
Other potential pitfalls can impede the triage process at the POI or CCP. Failure to consider HAZMAT or 
CBR contamination, IEDs placed near or on casualties, 
retained ordnance, or rescues requiring specialized 
expertise and equipment pose risks to medical teams. 
Lacking a coordinated and rehearsed team approach 
limits effective engagement with casualties. Inadequate 
medical size-up by the initial team will have repercussions for appropriate deployment and allocation of 
resources and staffing. Indecisive leadership causes 
obvious problems for subordinates carrying out the 
mission. Military rules of engagement may also affect 
triage operations if they restrict what care is authorized 
for noncritical casualties who may not be US or coalition personnel. 
Once casualties are triaged at the scene, they should 
be brought to a CCP, where they may be re-triaged into 
treatment areas. Many civilian and military hospitalbased emergency departments employ facility-based 
triage protocols that define expected time intervals 
for patient evaluation, such as the Emergency Severity Index. 86 However, this type of algorithm assumes 
a fully staffed and functional emergency department 
without resource constraints, thus allowing maximal 
resuscitation efforts of critical “full code” patients 
even if they have a poor prognosis. Expenditure of 
significant resources in personnel, time, and supplies 
may not allow for those resources to be used on other 
casualties under MASCAL conditions. 
No matter what system is used at any location, not 
all the information necessary to make a completely 
accurate assessment will be available for all victims 
at all times. “Over-triage” occurs when casualties 
are assessed to be more serious than they are. This 
results in allocation of scarce resources that could be 
used for other patients. “Under-triage” occurs when 
casualties are deemed to be less serious than they are, 
which can lead to potentially unnecessary morbidity 
and mortality. 83 There are no universally accepted 
best-practice cut-offs for over- or under-triage, which 
are analogous to excessive sensitivity or inadequate 
specificity. Over-triage is more common when children 
are affected in MCIs, or when inexperienced personnel 
or bystanders make triage decisions. 87,89 Most cultures 
would accept some excess over-triage that stresses the 
system in order to minimize the rate of under-triage 
that misses casualties who need emergent or urgent 
treatment. 
In resource-constrained situations, critical care 
efforts are reserved for immediately salvageable 
casualties so that multiple victims can be effectively 
managed. MCI triage protocols provide a structure to 
focus triage decisions in an objective manner rather 
than subjectively assigning treatment based on personal opinion or biases. This improves inter-user 
reliability and reduces over- or under-triaging that 
might divert appropriate resources from more critical injuries. 88 However, different triage systems were 
developed from different problem sets, so they may 
not be universally applicable. For instance, the START 
methodology was developed for response to injuries 
sustained during earthquakes. 84 It gained very wide 
acceptance, but it may not be as effective for other 
situations (eg, ASEs) or nontrauma scenarios. 90 SALT83 
has been recommended as a US national standard,91,92 
but has not yet been shown to improve outcomes in 
actual MCIs.
Casualty Collection Points 
Functions at CCPs include triage, field treatment, 
and evacuation staging. Maintaining casualty flow 
depends on rapid assessment, initial stabilization, 
and appropriate disposition. The location of a staging 
area should be near enough to the MCI to be effective 
without posing undue risk to medical staff. These areas 
should have well-designated ingress and egress points, 
a decontamination area, and access to nearby transport 
areas for air, ground, or water evacuation. Patient flow 
should be linear to designated category areas listed 
above to mitigate against choke points (Figure 34-3). 
Casualty movement through the triage site should not 
backtrack through the treatment areas. 
The triage officer oversees the triage team at the 
entry control point. Initial movement of casualties is 
directed toward the established treatment areas for 
stabilization or observation based on triage categories. 
Every member of the triage team should be familiar 
Figure 34-3 (right). Generic casualty-flow schematic of mass 
casualty incident response operations.
521
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
Minimal
Treatment
Area
Delayed
Treatment
Area
Immediate
Treatment
Area
Expectant
Treatment
Area
Morgue
Extraction
Triage/Treatment
Evacuation/Transportation
Casualty
Collection
Point
Casualty
Collection
Area
Vehicle
Loading
Area
Medical Triage Officer
Medical Regulating Officer
Transportation Coordination Officer
Vehicle Control Officer
Vehicle
Staging
Area
Veh
icle
 M
ove
me
nt
Ve
hic
le 
Mov
em
ent
522
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
with the triage protocols in use and train through 
functional drills to facilitate effective casualty movement. 32 Distribution of casualties may require changing 
personnel numbers to meet the rate of casualty arrival 
as staffing and space allow. 
Treatment areas should be aligned with the triage 
categories of immediate (red), delayed (yellow), and 
minimal (green)—where resuscitation, stabilizing procedures, and first aid may be given, respectively—if 
all of them are necessary and can be established prior 
to casualty arrival. Depending on circumstances and 
available resources, expectant (blue) casualties should 
be located near the critical-care (red) area for rapid 
access if future resources permit field interventions. 
Working areas should be spacious enough to manage anticipated number of casualties, be sheltered 
from the environment, have adequate illumination, 
and be climate controlled if feasible. Each area can be 
expanded and contracted as required to meet demand 
and efficient distribution of resources.
Additional considerations include the following 
questions:
 
• How should the area be secured?
 
• Does the location allow for easy access by litter 
teams bringing in casualties?
 
• How large should treatment areas be, and is 
there room for expansion if needed?
 
• Do treatment areas have optimal access to 
medical supplies?
 
• Does each area have unrestricted access to the 
transportation staging area?
 
• Where is the location for decedent casualties?
Medical regulators provide administrative oversight for patient tracking, provide overall casualty 
status updates (number and condition), and coordinate 
record-keeping during MCI operations. Information is 
relayed from respective medical recorders who identify, tag, and register patients in their treatment areas 
to the regulators who control evacuation. Casualties 
may be identified with any method that is reproducible 
and familiar to responders. Patients may be tracked 
by high-tech or low-tech methods, ranging from 
electronic medical records specifically designed for 
disasters,93 to a paper and plastic system similar to that 
used by air-traffic controllers,94 to a system of placing 
numbers on the casualties’ foreheads with indelible 
markers. Chosen methods should be consistently used 
throughout the MCI event.
Treatment teams should be comprised of medical 
personnel with appropriate levels of training to meet 
the medical requirements of the triage category assigned. The immediate area treatment teams should 
be familiar with interventional and resuscitative procedures in resource-constrained conditions. Other treatment areas can be staffed with providers and medics 
who do not have the same level of emergency skills, 
but who are able to care for delayed and minimal casualties and identify deterioration in their conditions.
Maintaining a dynamic triage process, where casualties are reassessed throughout the treatment areas, 
allows for recategorizing and changing treatment and 
evacuation priorities based on clinical status. Several 
special considerations affect triage flow. Situations 
with imminent threats may require “reverse triage,” 
in which casualties with minor problems in the green 
and yellow categories receive precedence in order to 
rapidly evacuate greater numbers from the scene for 
maximum overall survival, or first treating and returning to duty casualties who might play critical roles in 
stabilizing hazardous conditions, such as firefighting 
or combat security. 
From a safety standpoint, security and decontamination procedures should be in place at the CCP to prevent injury of personnel and thereby compromise the 
MCI response mission. Security checkpoints should 
be used for screening unidentified personnel escorting 
casualties, clearing potential weapons and removing 
unused ammunition, and searching for unexploded 
ordnance and IEDs before casualties enter the CCP. 
Decontamination stations are employed for suspected HAZMAT or CBR contamination. Decontamination 
teams should be well versed in procedural methods, 
have the appropriate level of personal protective 
equipment, and be familiar with hot, warm, and cold 
zones. Hot zones are designated areas around the immediate area of CBR contamination or incident scene. 
Entry into this zone should be through a controlled 
access point for accountability purposes and avoidance of contamination spread. Decontamination takes 
place in the warm zone, which is an area established 
around the hot zone as a buffer between the hot and 
cold zones. The cold zone is a contamination-free zone 
established around the warm zone where emergency 
operations can be directed and supported. 
Finally, several functions may be stationed near the 
CCP to avoid disrupting triage and treatment operations. These include mortuary services, a bereavement 
area, public affairs access point for media control, and 
family notification and reunification areas.
Incident magnitude may range from a few critical 
patients in ASEs to several hundred patients in hurricanes or earthquakes. Needed resources for large 
numbers of casualties presenting simultaneously may 
necessitate several dedicated triage teams and multiple 
CCPs. Transportation delays may occur due to inadequate vehicle numbers or types, inclement weather, 
523
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
damaged and blocked roadways or inaccessible sites, 
or ongoing disaster-induced obstructions (eg, fire, 
water, ice and snow). In these cases, CCPs may become 
impromptu field medical stations where casualties will 
be managed for potentially extended periods of time.
Transportation Management 
More severe casualties may be immediately transported from the scene instead of being brought to 
CCPs, depending on available resources and tactical 
conditions. Destinations may become “saturated” 
quickly, and transport routes may become inaccessible, 
requiring some receiving facilities to be bypassed for 
alternative sites. Situational awareness of the entire 
system allows provision of care and appropriate 
disposition for the greatest number of casualties presenting to be triaged. As patients are moved through 
the system of care, triage and re-triage occur based on 
changes in the status of the patient and the system. 
Just as triage is performed for treatment, it should 
also be applied to casualty transportation. The US 
military uses urgent, priority, routine, and convenience evacuation categories to indicate how soon a 
casualty requires the next step in care. On a tactical 
level (essentially ground and rotary-wing evacuation), 
“urgent” signifies the need for care within the next 
hour (previously 2 hours by doctrine, until the secretary of defense mandated 1 hour in 200995). “Priority” 
indicates evacuation is needed within 4 hours, and 
“routine” indicates 24 hours. “Convenience” refers to 
casualties who can be transported on the next vehicle 
with space available. On a strategic level (involving 
fixed-wing assets operated by the US Air Force), “urgent” communicates a request for evacuation as soon 
as possible, “priority” indicates within 24 hours, and 
“routine” means on the next aircraft with space available, but generally within 72 hours.
Other aspects of transportation triage must also be 
considered. One consideration is that evacuation categories do not necessarily have to align with treatment 
categories. Although most casualties who remain in the 
immediate treatment category after field interventions 
will likely be placed in the urgent evacuation category, 
those designated for delayed treatment based on what 
can be done for them in the prehospital setting might 
be assigned any of the urgent, priority, or routine 
evacuation categories based on how soon they need 
additional care. Another consideration involves prioritizing patients within a transportation category. For 
instance, if ten patients are awaiting urgent evacuation 
and only one helicopter with open berths arrives, the 
transportation officer must choose which two or three 
of the ten will be loaded on the aircraft. Patient condition, capabilities of the medical crew, capabilities and 
capacity of the intended destination, transportation 
time, and potential detrimental effects of movement 
must all be taken into account.
Casualty destinations are suggested based on proximity, but the closest facility may not always be the 
most appropriate. 95–98 The closest facility might not be 
the one that can be reached in the shortest time, and it 
might not be capable of receiving more casualties without degrading the level of care delivered to all patients. 
In general, transportation time should be minimized 
both for casualty care and to place vehicular assets 
back in service quickly. However, at any moment in 
the course of the response, some casualties should be 
taken to medical facilities farther from the incident to 
avoid resource saturation or to access specialty services 
that may be further away. If any casualties have to 
be transported to closer but less capable facilities for 
initial stabilization, redistribution to regional trauma 
or referral centers may occur later. 
As casualties are moved away from the scene of an 
MCI or transported from one medical capability to 
another, it is important not to turn a MASCAL at one 
location into a MASCAL at another location by overwhelming any given receiving facility. At the same time, 
it is the responsibility of the sending MMO to ensure 
the transportation mode and the platform used is the 
most appropriate for the casualty and the tactical situation. The MMO must ensure that the evacuation vehicle 
is sufficiently staffed and equipped to manage any 
specialty equipment (eg, a ventilator) and to perform 
intervention for any reasonably foreseeable deterioration. Additionally, personnel at the receiving facility 
must be fully informed of the casualty’s problems, 
what management has already been undertaken and 
what the results were, and what issues still need to be 
addressed. All documentation of care rendered prior to 
arrival and during treatment at the sending facility must 
accompany the patient or be securely transmitted to the 
receiving facility. (Continuation of care during transportation between treatment roles is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 39, Casualty Transport and Evacuation.) 
SUMMARY
Effective management of MCIs requires planning, coordination, and communication. Goals of 
the responding assets are to bring medical and other 
essential resources to casualties when affected infrastructure cannot support a desirable standard of care 
for all those in need. MASCAL situations continue to 
524
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
arise in both garrison and deployed settings, caused 
by natural phenomena and armed conflict, whether 
mitigation and response resources are available or 
not. Individuals, teams, units, communities, states, 
and nations must be prepared to respond quickly and 
effectively if excess morbidity and mortality—physical 
or psychological—is to be prevented, moderated, or 
avoided. Military medical personnel must be vigilant 
and continuously prepared for the wide variety of 
operations in which they may be tasked, from local 
incidents (motor vehicle crashes, ASEs, etc) to defense 
support to civil authorities, foreign humanitarian assistance, and combat operations. Medical and surgical skills must be developed and practiced. Specific 
capabilities must be built into healthcare systems from 
backpacks to tents to constructed MTFs, and then 
integrated into surrounding communities or host nations when feasible. Potential requirements to increase 
capacity for surges in casualty rates must be considered 
in every setting.
MCIs are by definition situations in which not every 
casualty can be treated in the way they would be if 
unlimited resources were available, but these incidents 
can be managed in a reasonable and acceptable manner 
for the exigencies of each individual situation. MMOs 
must be ready to advise leadership on capabilities and 
preparations, respond with interventional skills and 
knowledge of how they fit into the overall healthcare 
system, and embrace change to improve processes far 
into the future.
REFERENCES
 
1. World Health Organization. Disaster Risk Management for Health: Mass Casualty Management. Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization; May 2011. http://www.who.int/hac/events/drm_fact_sheet_mass_casualty_management.
pdf?ua=1. Accessed May 26, 2017. 
 
2. Mallonee S, Shariat S, Stennies G, et al. Physical injuries and fatalities resulting from the Oklahoma City bombing. 
JAMA. 1996;276:382–387. 
 
3. Hogan DE, Waekerle JF, Dire DJ, et al. Emergency department impact of the Oklahoma City terrorist bombing. Ann 
Emerg Med. 1999;34:160–167.
 
4. US Geological Survey. Mount St. Helens—from the 1980 eruption to 2000. Fact sheet 036-00, online version 1. 0. https://
pubs.usgs.gov/fs/2000/fs036-00/. Accessed May 26, 2017. 
 
5. Shoemaker E. Asteroid and comet bombardment of the Earth. Ann Rev Earth Planet Sci. 1983;11:461–494.
 
6. AtomicArchive.com. A tale of two cities: Hiroshima and Nagasaki. http://www.atomicarchive.com/History/twocities/
index.shtml. Accessed May 26, 2017.
 
7. Burkle FM. Complex humanitarian emergencies: a review of epidemiological and response models. J Postgrad Med. 
2006;52:109–114.
 
8. Keen D. Introduction. In: Complex Emergencies. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Polity Press; 2008: 1–3.
 
9. Sharp TW, Wightman JM, Davis MJ, Sherman SS, Burkle FM. Military assistance in complex emergencies: what have 
we learned since the Kurdish relief effort? Prehosp Disast Med. 2001;16:197–208.
 10. Lumley J, Ryan JM. Disasters and catastrophes. In: Lumley JSP, Ryan JM, Baxter PJ, Kirby N, eds. Handbook of the 
Medical Care of Catastrophes. London, United Kingdom: Royal Society of Medicine; 1996: 1–8.
 11. Seiple C. Operation Restore Hope. In: The U.S. Military/NGO Relationship in Humanitarian Interventions. Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army Peacekeeping Institute; 1996: 97–138.
 12. Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Response to the 2011 Joplin, Missouri, Tornado: Lessons Learned Study. 
Washington, DC: FEMA; 2011.
 13. Institute of Medicine. Medical Surge Capacity: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2010. 
 14. Blair JP, Schweit KW. A Study of Active Shooter Incidents, 2000–2013. Washington, DC: US Department of Justice; 2014.
525
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
 15. Mass shootings. Gun Violence Archive. http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/mass-shooting. Accessed February 10, 
2018.
 16. Arnold JL, Halpern P, Tsai MC, Smithline H. Mass casualty terrorist bombings: a comparison of outcomes by bombing 
type. Ann Emerg Med. 2004;43:263–273.
 17. Mahoney EJ, Harrington DT, Biffl WL, Metzger J, Oka T, Cioffi WG. Lessons learned from a nightclub fire: institutional 
disaster preparedness. J Trauma. 2005;58:487–491.
 18. Wightman JM, Gladish SL. Explosions and blast injuries. Ann Emerg Med. 2001;37:664–678.
 19. Burns GD, Wightman JM. Explosive events. In: Koenig KA, Schultz CH, eds. Koenig & Schultz’s Disaster Medicine: Comprehensive Principles and Practices. 2nd ed. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press; 2016: 463–485.
 20. Steffen R, Bouchama A, Johansson A, et al. Non-communicable health risks during mass gatherings. Lancet Infect Dis. 
2012;12:142–149.
 21. Soomaroo L, Murray V. Disasters at mass gatherings: lessons from history. PLoS Curr. 2012;4:RRN1301.
 22. Turris SA, Lund A, Bowles RR. An analysis of mass casualty incidents in the setting of mass gatherings and special 
events. Dis Med Pub Health Prepared. 2014;8:143–149.
 23. Burkle FM. Complex public health emergencies. In: Koenig KA, Schultz CH, eds. Koenig & Schultz’s Disaster Medicine: 
Comprehensive Principles and Practices. 2nd ed. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press; 2016: 433–449.
 24. Wightman JM, Dice WH. Winter storms and hazards. In: Koenig KA, Schultz CH, eds. Koenig & Schultz’s Disaster 
Medicine: Comprehensive Principles and Practices. 2nd ed. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press; 
2016: 670–691.
 25. Katz E, Ofek B, Adler J, et al. Primary blast injury after a bomb explosion on a civilian bus. Ann Surg. 1989;209:484–488.
 26. Liebovici D, Grofit ON, Stein M, et al. Blast injuries: bus versus open-air bombings—a comparison study of injuries 
of survivors of open-air versus confined-space explosions. J Trauma. 1996;41:1030–1035.
 27. Pizov R, Oppenheim-Eden, Matot I, et al. Blast lung injury from an explosion on a civilian bus. Chest. 1999;115:165–172.
 28. Ramirez M, Peek-Asa C. Epidemiology of traumatic injuries from earthquakes. Epidemiol Rev. 2005;27:47–55.
 29. Auerbach PS, Norris RL, Menon AS, et al. Civil–military collaboration in the initial medical response to the earthquake 
in Haiti. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:e32.
 30. Federal Emergency Management Agency. Emergency management: definition, vision, mission, principles. https://
training.fema.gov/hiedu/docs/emprinciples/0907_176%20em%20principles12x18v2f%20johnson%20(w-o%20draft).
pdf. Accessed May 26, 2017.
 31. Department of Homeland Security. National Response Framework. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: Department of Homeland 
Security; 2016.
 32. Ross JM, Szalma JL, Hancock PA. Efficacy of transfer in simulation-based training: implications for stress exposure 
training. http://www.mind.foi.se/SAWMAS/SAWMAS-2004/Papers/P15-SAWMAS-2004-J-Ross.pdf. Accessed February 
5, 2018.
 33. United Nations Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction. Early-Warning Practices Can Save Lives: 
Selected Examples, Good Practices and Lessons Learned. Bonn, Germany: UNISDR; 2010.
 34. Gates J, Arabian S, Biddinger P, et al. The initial response to the Boston Marathon bombing: lessons learned to prepare 
for the next disaster. Ann Surg. 2014;260:960–966.
526
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 35. National Emergency Management Association. Emergency Management Assistance Compact website. What is EMAC? 
http://emacweb.org/index.php/learn-about-emac/what-is-emac. Accessed June 6, 2017.
 36. National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians. Prehospital Trauma Life Support. https://www.naemt.org/
education/phtls. Accessed February 3, 2018.
 37. US Department of Homeland Security. Stop the Bleed. https://www.dhs.gov/stopthebleed. Accessed February 3, 2018.
 38. Shultz JM, Russell J, Espinel Z. Epidemiology of tropical cyclones: the dynamics of disaster, disease, and development. 
Epidemiol Rev. 2005;27:21–35.
 39. Federal Emergency Management Agency. Incident Command System Training. Washington, DC: FEMA; May 2008. 
http://training.fema.gov/emiweb/is/icsresource/assets/reviewmaterials.pdf. Accessed April 8, 2017.
 40. US Department of Defense. Joint Health Services. Washington, DC: DoD; 2017. Joint Publication 4-02.
 41. US Department of Health and Human Services. National Disaster Medical System. http://www.phe.gov/Preparedness/
responders/ndms/Pages/default.aspx Accessed February 3, 2018. 
 42. US Department of Defense. Defense Support of Civil Authorities. Washington, DC: DoD; 2013. Joint Publication 3-29.
 43. US Department of Defense. Strategy for homeland defense and civil support. https://fas.org/man/eprint/homedefstrat.
pdf. Accessed February 3, 2018. 
 44. Donahue A, Tuohy R. Lessons we don’t learn: a study of the lessons of disasters, why we repeat them, and how we 
can learn them. Home Sec Aff. 2006;2. http://www.hsaj.org/?article=2. 2. 4. Accessed May 26, 2017.
 45. Lindell M, Prater C, Peacock W. Organizational communication and decision making for hurricane emergencies. Nat 
Hazard Rev. 2007;8:50–60.
 46. US Department of Defense. Foreign Disaster Relief. Washington, DC: DoD; 2012. DoD Directive 5100. 46. http://www.
dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/510046p.pdf. Accessed May 23, 2017.
 47. US Department of Defense. Foreign Humanitarian Assistance. Washington, DC: DoD; 2014. Joint Publication 3-28.
 48. Kazzi AA, Langdorf, MI, Handly N, White K, Ellis K. Earthquake epidemiology: the 1994 Los Angeles earthquake 
emergency department experience at a community hospital. Prehosp Disaster Med. 2000;15:20–27.
 49. Maegele M, Gregor S, Steinhausen E, et al. The long-distance tertiary air transfer and care of tsunami victims: injury 
pattern and microbiological and psychological aspects. Crit Care Med. 2005;33:1136–1140.
 50. Noji EK. Medical and public health consequences of natural and biological disasters. Nat Hazard Rev. 2001;2:143–156.
 51. World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters. EM-DAT: The OFDA/
CRED International Disasters Data Base. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO; 2009. http://www.emdat.be/database. Accessed 
February 9, 2018.
 52. Sever MS, Vanholder R, Lameire N. Management of crush-related injuries after disasters. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1052–
1063.
 53. Seiple C. Operation Sea Angel. In: The U.S. Military/NGO Relationship in Humanitarian Interventions. Carlisle Barracks, 
PA: US Army Peacekeeping Institute; 1996: 65–96.
 54. United Nations Development Programme. Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development. New York, NY: John S. 
Swift Company; 2004.
 55. Brennan RJ, Nandy R. Complex humanitarian emergencies: a major global health challenge. Emerg Med. 2001;13:147–156.
527
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
 56. Champion HR, Bellamy RF, Roberts P, Leppaniemi A. A profile of combat injury. J Trauma. 2003;54(suppl 5):S13–S19.
 57. Owens BD, Kragh JF, Wenke JC, Macaitis J, Wade CE, Holcomb JB. Combat wounds in Operation Iraqi Freedom and 
Operation Enduring Freedom. J Trauma. 2008;64:295–299.
 58. Kotwal RS, Montgomery HR, Kotwal BS, et al. Eliminating preventable death on the battlefield. Arch Surg. 2011;146:1350–
1358.
 59. Blood CG, Zhang J, Walker GJ. Implications for modeling casualty sustainment during peacekeeping operations. Mil 
Med. 2002;167:868–872.
 60. Belmont PJ, Schoenfeld AJ, Goodman G. Epidemiology of combat wounds in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation 
Enduring Freedom: orthopaedic burden of disease. J Surg Ortho Adv. 2010;19:2–7.
 61. Beebe GW, DeBakey ME. Death from wounding. In: Battle Casualties: Incidence, Mortality, and Logistics Considerations. 
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas; 1952: 74–147.
 62. Hardaway RM. Viet Nam wound analysis. J Trauma. 1978;18:635–643.
 63. Holcomb JB, Stansbury LG, Champion HR, et al. Understanding combat casualty care statistics. J Trauma. 2006;60:397–
401.
 64. Bartlett CS. Clinical update: gunshot wound ballistics. Clin Ortho Relat Res. 2003;408:28–57.
 65. Beekley AC, Martin MJ, Spinella PC, Telian SP, Holcomb JB. Predicting resource needs for multiple and mass casualty 
events in combat: lessons learned from combat support hospital experience in Operation Iraqi Freedom. J Trauma. 
2009;66(suppl 4):S129–S137.
 66. Knebel AR, Coleman CN, Cliffer KD, et al. After a nuclear detonation: setting the context. Dis Med Public Health Prepared. 2011;5(suppl 1):S20–S31.
 67. Federal Emergency Management Agency. National Response Framework: Radiological/Nuclear Incident Annex. http://
www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nrf/nrf_nuclearradiologicalincidentannex.pdf. Accessed February 7, 2018.
 68. Health Systems Research Inc. Altered Standards of Care in Mass Casualty Events. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare 
Research & Quality; 2005. AHRQ Publication No. 05-0043.
 69. Venticinque SG, Grathwohl, KW. Critical care in the austere environment: providing exceptional care in unusual 
places. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:S284–S292.
 70. Kolbe AR, Hutson RA, Shannon H, et al. Mortality, crime and access to basic needs before and after the Haiti earthquake: a random survey of Port-au-Prince households. Med Conf Surviv. 2010;26:281–297.
 71. US Department of Health and Human Services. Emergency system for advance registration of volunteer health professionals. http://www.phe.gov/esarvhp/pages/about.aspx. Accessed February 7, 2018.
 72. US Department of Health and Human Services. Medical Reserve Corps. https://mrc.hhs.gov/HomePage. Accessed 
February 3, 2018. 
 73. National Disaster Medical System. https://www.phe.gov/Preparedness/responders/ndms/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed February 10, 2018.
 74. National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster. http://www.nvoad.org. Accessed December 27, 2017.
 75. World Health Organization. http://www.who.org. Accessed February 8, 2018.
 76. Sauer LM, Catlett C, Tosatto R, Kirsch TD. The utility of and risks associated with the use of spontaneous volunteers 
in disaster response: a survey. Disaster Med Pub Health Prep. 2014;8:65–69.
528
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 77. Merchant RM, Janet E. Leigh JE, Lurie N. Health care volunteers and disaster response—first, be prepared. N Engl J 
Med. 2010;362:872–873.
 78. Institute of Medicine. Preparedness and Response to a Rural Mass Casualty Incident: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 2011. 
 79. Doocy S, Jacquet G, Cherewick M, Kirsch TD. The injury burden of the 2010 Haiti earthquake: a stratified cluster 
survey. Injury. 2013;44:842–847. 
 80. World Health Organization. Mass Casualty Management Systems. Strategies and Guidelines for Building Health Sector 
Capacity. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO; 2007. http://www.who.int/hac/techguidance/tools/mcm_guidelines_en.pdf. 
Accessed February 10, 2018. 
 81. Cao H, Huang S. Principles of scarce medical resource allocation in natural disaster relief: a simulation approach. Med 
Decis Making. 2012;32:470–476.
 82. Cross KP, Cicero MX. Head-to-head comparison of disaster triage methods in pediatric, adult and geriatric patients. 
Ann Emerg Med. 2013;61:668–676.
 83. Lerner EB, Schwartz RB, Coule PL, et al. Mass casualty triage: an evaluation of the data and development of a proposed 
national guideline. Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 2008;2(suppl 1):S25–S34.
 84. Benson M, Koenig KL, Schultz CH. Disaster triage: START, then SAVE—a new method of dynamic triage for victims 
of catastrophic earthquake. Prehosp Disast Med. 1996;11:117-124.
 85. Romig L. Pediatric triage: system to JumpSTART your triage of young patients at MCIs. J Emerg Med Serv. 2002;27:52–
58,60–53.
 86. Gilboy N, Tanabe T, Travers D, Rosenau AM. Emergency Severity Index (ESI): A Triage Tool for Emergency Department 
Care, Version 4. Implementation Handbook 2012 Edition. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 
2011. AHRQ Publication No. 12-0014.
 87. Kennedy K, Aghababian RV, Gans L, Lewis CP. Triage: techniques and applications in decision making. Ann Emerg 
Med. 1996;28:136–144.
 88. Engum SA, Mitchell MK, Scherer LR, et al. Prehospital triage in the injured pediatric patient. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:82–87.
 89. Jenkins JL, McCarthy ML, Sauer LM, et al. Mass-casualty triage: time for an evidence-based approach. Prehosp Disaster 
Med. 2008;23:3–8.
 90. Kahn CA, Schultz CH, Miller KT, et al. Does START triage work? An outcomes assessment after a disaster. Ann Emerg 
Med. 2009;54:424–430,430.e421.
 91. SALT mass casualty triage: concept endorsed by the American College of Emergency Physicians, American College of 
Surgeons Committee on Trauma, American Trauma Society, National Association of EMS Physicians, National Disaster 
Life Support Education Consortium, and State and Territorial Injury Prevention Directors Association. Disaster Med 
Public Health Prep. 2008;2:245–246.
 92. American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Emergency Physicians, American College of Surgeons, et al. 
Model uniform core criteria for mass casualty triage. Disaster Med Pub Health Prep. 2011;5:125–128.
 93. DeMers G, Khan C, Buono C, et al. Secure scalable disaster electronic medical record and tracking system. Prehosp 
Disaster Med. 2013;28:498–501.
 94. Graham RF, Hoskins JD, Cortijo MP, Barbee GA, Folio LR, Lutz CC. A casualty tracking system modeled after air 
traffic control methodology employed in a Combat Support Hospital in Iraq. Mil Med. 2011;176:244–245.
529
Mass Casualty Preparedness and Response
 95. Hudak JJ. The Origins of the “Golden Hour” of Medical Care and its Applicability to Combat Medicine. Leavenworth, KS: US 
Army Command and General Staff College; 2015. 
 96. Einav S, Feigenberg Z, Weissman C, et al. Evacuation priorities in mass casualty terror-related events: implications 
for contingency planning. Ann Surg. 2007;239:304–310.
 97. Raiter Y, Farfel A, Lehavi O, et al. Mass casualty incident management, triage, injury distribution of casualties and 
rate of arrival of casualties at the hospitals: lessons from a suicide bomber attack in downtown Tel Aviv. Emerg Med 
J. 2008;25:225–229.
 98. Bloch YH, Schwartz D, Pinkert M, et al. Distribution of casualties in a mass-casualty incident with three local hospitals in the periphery of a densely populated area: lessons learned from the medical management of a terrorist attack. 
Prehosp Disaster Med. 2007;22:186–192.
530
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
