381
Sleep, Rest, and Recovery
Chapter 26
SLEEP, REST, AND RECOVERY
ANGELA M. YARNELL, PhD*; MATTHEW L. LOPRESTI, PhD†; OMOTOLA O. LANLOKUN, BS‡; and THOMAS J. 
BALKIN, PhD§
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
BACKGROUND
MILITARY SERVICE AND SLEEP DEFICITS
ROLE OF MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
SLEEP HYGIENE AND FATIGUE MANAGEMENT TOOLS
GUIDANCE TO COMMANDING OFFICER
SUMMARY
SLEEP MANAGEMENT RESOURCES
*Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Research Psychologist, Behavioral Biology Branch, Center for Military Psychiatry Neuroscience Research, 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland
†Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Deputy Director, US Army Medical Research Directorate-West, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 
Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington
‡Research Intern, ORISE, Behavioral Biology Branch, Center for Military Psychiatry & Neuroscience, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Forest 
Glen, Maryland
§Fellow, ORISE Knowledge Preservation Program, Behavioral Biology Branch, Center for Military Psychiatry & Neuroscience, Walter Reed Army 
Institute of Research, Forest Glen, Maryland
382
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Sleep is important to every aspect of performance 
involving the brain. Therefore, adequate sleep, rest, 
and recovery (reset) are critical components of any 
successful military training program or operational 
mission. The reset process requires adequate rest and 
recovery time after a major physiological or psychological insult such as an intense experience or demanding work period.
Friction often exists between meeting mission requirements and obtaining adequate sleep or rest in 
an operational environment. Commanders naturally 
want to know the minimum amount of sleep or rest 
needed to maintain military effectiveness during missions, between missions, and for full recovery or reset.
This chapter provides military medical officers 
(MMOs) information needed to advise unit commanders on appropriate management of sleep and 
alertness in their troops. MMOs play an important role 
in promoting sleep health and teaching tools service 
members can use to maximize good sleep practices. 
DEFINITIONS
Sleep represents a physiological function of the 
brain and is required to maintain health and performance. Exhibit 26-1 further defines sleep and provides 
a popular theory about sleep and wake. Rest refers to 
periods of time when no tasks are being performed 
(time off task). Performance improvement results from 
rest, but rest does not equal sleep. During sleep, rest 
occurs, but not vice versa.
There is broad agreement about what sleep is and 
how it can be identified and measured, but there is no 
consensus regarding the ultimate functions of sleep. 
In 1976, Naitoh observed that sleep deprivation studies have served only to “confirm repeatedly a truism: 
[sleep loss] makes animals and humans sleepy.”1 
Although this observation remains largely true today, 
the past 4 decades of sleep research has produced a 
wealth of knowledge and some compelling hypotheses regarding the functions of sleep. For example, 
Tononi and Cirelli2 hypothesize that sleep serves to 
prune away excess, energy-depleting synaptic connections that accrue during wakefulness, making 
the well-slept cortex optimally efficient—a state that 
manifests behaviorally as optimal alertness and cognitive performance.
Sleepiness and fatigue are frequently used interchangeably, but are best considered as distinct phenomena. Sleepiness is best defined as the propensity 
or readiness to initiate sleep. It varies as an interactive 
function of sleep debt (caused by inadequate sleep) 
EXHIBIT 26-1
TWO-PROCESS THEORY OF SLEEP 
“Sleep is a dynamic behavior . . . a special activity of the brain controlled by precise and elaborate 
mechanisms.”1 Sleep serves a homeostatic function 
in the body and is marked by reduced consciousness, reduced response to environmental stimuli, 
and dreaming. Alexander Borbély, a Swiss sleep 
researcher, presented a model in the early 1980s 
to describe the regulation of the sleep–wake cycle. 
He proposed that this cycle is regulated by two 
interacting mechanisms, or processes of sleep–wake 
regulation2: 
 
• Process C represents circadian rhythm, or the 
regulation of the body’s internal processes 
and alertness levels, governed by the internal 
biological clock.
 
• Process S represents the accrual of the physiological need for sleep during wakefulness 
that manifests as a homeostatic drive for 
sleep.
1. Hobson JA. Sleep. New York, NY: Scientific American 
Library; 1989: 1.
2. Borbély AA. A two process model of sleep regulation. 
Hum Neurobiol. 1982;1(3):195–204. 
Inadequate
sleep
Sleepiness
Fatigue
Impaired
Performance
Time-on-task
Figure 26-1. Although sleepiness and fatigue are caused by 
different factors, both affect performance.
383
Sleep, Rest, and Recovery
and the circadian rhythm of alertness. 3 Sleepiness 
is marked by deficits in alertness and cognitive performance4 related to deactivation of brain regions 
associated with higher order cognitive functions (eg, 
prefrontal cortex). 5 Sleepiness can only be reversed 
by sleep. 
Fatigue is defined as a subjective awareness of declining abilities, due to increasing mental effort6 that 
results from increasing “time on task.” Fatigue may 
be accompanied by observable decrements in performance7 after prolonged or repeated tasks that vary as 
a result of cognitive load or task difficulty and time 
on task. 8 Unlike sleepiness, fatigue can be reversed 
by “time off task.”
Sleepiness and fatigue both result in performance 
decrements; however, these phenomena are physiologically different. Fatigue accrues as a function of “time 
on task,” whereas sleepiness accrues as an interactive 
function of “time awake” and the circadian rhythm 
of alertness,8 as shown in Figure 26-1. Sleepiness is 
reversed by sleep, and fatigue is reversed with rest. 
Physicians should explore patient complaints of 
fatigue because patients may be using it in different 
ways to describe tiredness or malaise (eg, as associated 
with depression or diabetes). When sustained performance is required, appropriate interventions should 
be recommended on the basis of both “time on task” 
and “time awake” variables.
BACKGROUND
With mounting scientific evidence suggesting 
its importance for health, safety, and performance, 
adequate sleep has increasingly become the focus of 
the US military’s efforts to improve and sustain the 
effectiveness, short-term and long-term well-being, 
and quality of life of service members. 9 The array of 
deleterious effects resulting from sleep loss is wide. 
One particularly important effect is impaired immune 
function. 10 
 In the short term, acute sleep deprivation results 
in impaired cognitive performance including the following11–14:
 
• reduced vigilance and situational awareness,
 
• impaired critical thinking and problem 
solving, 
 
• compromised decision-making, and
 
• deficits in motivation.
This impaired cognitive performance may increase 
likelihood of accidents and suboptimal task and 
mission completion. Psychological impacts such as 
enhanced symptoms of pain, fatigue, and negative 
moods may also affect well-being and job performance. 
In the longer term, chronic sleep restriction has been 
shown to lead to impaired alertness and performance 
that accrues over days and weeks in a dose-dependent 
manner. 15,16 
In recent years, the effects of chronic sleep restriction 
on health and well-being have been found to include 
reduced resilience to stress-related disorders such as 
the following:
 
• posttraumatic stress disorder and 
depression,17–21 
 
• cardiovascular disease,22 
 
• type II diabetes,23 
 
• metabolic syndrome and weight changes,24,25 
and 
 
• mortality. 26,27 
Recent epidemiological evidence also suggests that 
chronic reduced sleep may predict dementing illnesses 
such as Alzheimer disease. 28
MILITARY SERVICE AND SLEEP DEFICITS
Sleep disturbances are common among military 
personnel. Problems may begin at the start of a military 
career and do not discriminate by rank. Recruits at 
basic training as well as cadets at the service academies 
typically obtain less than the recommended 8 hours of 
sleep per night. For example, at the US Military Academy, cadets obtain an average of less than 5. 5 hours 
of sleep per night during their 4 years of training. 29–31
Deployed service members are impacted even more. 
Because modern military operations are often characterized by high operational tempos, with 24-hourper-day activity and austere, non-sleep-conducive 
environments, chronic sleep restriction is widespread 
among deployed troops. Deployed service members 
report that they average significantly less than the recommended 8 hours of sleep per night,32,33 and less than 
the amount of sleep obtained in garrison. 34 They report 
averaging less than 6 hours of sleep per night, and over 
half report experiencing some sleep deprivation. 35 A 
study of deployed US Air Force personnel revealed 
that 75% reported sleep that was so poor they met the 
diagnostic criteria for insomnia. 32 Nighttime duties 
and poor sleep environments are the major factors 
impacting sleep while deployed. 36 US Navy personnel 
384
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
are no strangers to poor sleep either. Submariners, for 
example, report poor quality and quantity of sleep 
while at sea (< 6 h) compared to shore duty (~7 h) or 
while on leave (>7 h). 37 On surface ships, sailors who 
work the night shift topside and are exposed to bright 
morning sun just prior to bedtime (in the ascending 
phase of the circadian rhythm) sleep less (4. 7 h) than 
sailors who work below deck during the night shift 
(7. 4 h) without exposure to sunlight prior to bedtime. 38 
Furthermore, it has been shown that subjective 
reports of sleep duration and habituation to chronic 
sleep restriction are not accurate and do not reflect 
physiological adaptation. 39,40 Because subjective measures of sleepiness do not always accurately reflect 
the actual level of sleepiness-related impairment, 
objective measures of sleep such as wrist actigraphy 
are critical for the evaluation of both individual and 
unit-level readiness, especially in operational environments where performance is critical to mission 
success. Actigraphy has been shown to be a valuable 
tool to supplement fatigue risk-management systems 
for monitoring alertness in various high-risk and shiftwork environments, including aviation,41,42 trucking,43 
and hospitals. 44 More information about using tools 
such as actigraphy to implement good sleep hygiene 
practices is detailed below.
There is emerging evidence that military personnel 
may be especially susceptible to a unique constellation of symptoms comprising a newly proposed 
syndrome called trauma-associated sleep disorder. 45 
This proposed syndrome is similar to, and could easily 
be confused with, rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder because both are characterized by disinhibition of voluntary muscle movement during rapid eye 
movement sleep (resulting in the “acting out” of dream 
mentation). However, there are several critical differences that may affect prognosis and treatment, which 
are listed in Exhibit 26-2.
EXHIBIT 26-2
COMPARISON OF TRAUMA-ASSOCIATED SLEEP DISORDER WITH RAPID EYE MOVEMENT 
SLEEP BEHAVIOR DISORDER 
Trauma Associated Sleep Disorder
 
• Disinhibition of voluntary muscle movement 
during REM sleep
 
• Triggered by traumatic event
 
• 50% comorbidity with posttraumatic stress 
disorder
 
• Repetitive dream mentation
 
• Dreams involve reenactment of traumatic triggering event
 
• No evidence of association with developing 
other neurologic disorders later in life
 
• Some success in treatment with prazosin
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
 
• Disinhibition of voluntary muscle movement 
during REM sleep
 
• Spontaneous onset
 
• Can indicate future diagnosis of Parkinson 
disease
REM: rapid eye movement
Data sources: (1) Mysliwiec V, O’Reilly B, Polchinski J, Kwon HP, Germain A, Roth BJ. Trauma associated sleep disorder: a proposed parasomnia encompassing disruptive nocturnal behaviors, nightmares, and REM without atonia in trauma survivors. J 
Clin Sleep Med. 2014;10(10):1143–1148. (2) Postuma RB, Gagnon JF, Bertrand JA, Genier Marchand D, Montplaisir JY. Parkinson 
risk in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder: Preparing for neuroprotective trials. Neurology. 2015;84(11):1104–1113.
ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
The MMO plays a vital role in the education and 
training of unit leadership and personnel with regard 
to the importance of adequate sleep and the relationship between sleep and health. The US Army Performance Triad46 recognizes that optimal readiness, 
health, and performance cannot be achieved without 
sufficient sleep, physical activity, and proper nutrition. 
MMOs should become familiar with this program and 
be prepared to assist service members to develop and 
achieve their sleep, activity, and nutrition goals. 
Sleep is a primary physiological need, like hunger 
or thirst, but the “consumption” of sleep may be 
more heavily influenced by social and environmental factors than eating or drinking. Unit leaders and 
personnel often underestimate the amount of time 
needed for getting good quality, restorative sleep. 
385
Sleep, Rest, and Recovery
In military culture, sleep loss may be considered a 
sign of mental or physical toughness. 30 In fact, the 
opposite is true. MMOs must be prepared to educate 
unit personnel and leadership on the importance of 
adequate sleep to brain function and performance, 
and ultimately to the mission. This requires integration of good sleep hygiene practices into all relevant 
unit activities (eg, mission planning, work–rest 
cycles, shift scheduling).
Insufficient sleep threatens the mission in a number 
of ways. Failure to obtain adequate or restorative sleep 
can result in loss of energy, weariness, difficulty concentrating, and memory deficits. 47 Although service 
members sometimes endure periods of total sleep 
deprivation, chronic sleep restriction (insufficient 
daily sleep) is practically ubiquitous in deployed 
environments, which are characterized by adverse or 
constrained conditions. 48 Chronically sleep-restricted 
individuals may subjectively adapt to repeated or 
prolonged periods of sleep loss, but from an objective 
standpoint (ie, in terms of the effects of sleep loss on 
objectively measured performance), there is little evidence of adaptation. Figure 26-2 shows that chronic 
sleep restriction and total sleep deprivation both have 
qualitatively equivalent effects on performance; all that 
varies is the rate at which these deficits accrue. Even 
for elite service members who are highly trained and 
experienced, sleep loss results in significant decrements in vital cognitive abilities including vigilance, 
memory, and reasoning. 49 Basic guidance regarding 
the management of sleep and alertness is available in 
Army Techniques Publication 6-22. 5, A Leader’s Guide 
to Soldier Health and Fitness. 50
Because sleep loss impacts a wide array of cognitive 
abilities and performance, it constitutes a significant 
threat to military personnel and operations. For example, sleep loss slows psychomotor responses and 
results in attentional lapses. 51 These lapses and slowed 
performance in some cases reflect microsleep—brief 
(0. 5–15. 0 s) intrusions of sleep into periods of wakefulness. 52 In fact, sleepiness-induced performance 
deficits (eg, lowered reaction time and impaired judgment) can occur even in the absence of microsleep. 
Microsleep episodes are sufficient but not necessary 
to produce sleepiness-related performance deficits. 
Duties performed by service members are often dangerous or conducted in dangerous environments. 
Lapses in performance and attention are not only 
safety concerns, they are also threats to mission success. Additionally, insufficient sleep results in poor 
decision-making, especially for decisions involving 
Figure 26-2. Mean number of lapses on the psychomotor 
vigilance task (and standard error) across days as a function 
of time in bed group. 
B: baseline; E: experimental phase; R: recovery phase; HR: 
hours (time in bed)
Reproduced with permission from: Belenky G, Wesensten NJ, 
Thorne DR, et al. Patterns of performance degradation and 
restoration during sleep restriction and subsequent recovery: 
a sleep dose-response study. J Sleep Res. 2003;12(1):12.
Mean number of lapses
20
15
10
5
0
B
E1
E2
E3
E4 E5 E6 E7 R1 R2 R3
9-HR
7-HR
5-HR
3-HR
Day
Figure 26-3. In the short term, effective management of sleep 
and alertness in the operational environment promotes 
safety,1 military effectiveness,2 and psychological resilience. 3 
In the long term, a consistent regimen of adequate sleep may 
have multiple health benefits, including a relatively reduced 
risk of developing heart disease, cancer, type II diabetes, and 
Alzheimer disease. 4
1. Thomas MJ, Ferguson SA. Prior sleep, prior wake, and 
crew performance during normal flight operations. Aviat 
Space Environ Med. 2010;81(7):665–670.
2. Wesensten NJ, Balkin TJ. The challenge of sleep management in military operations. US Army Med Dep J. 2013;OctDec:109–118.
3. Germain A. Resilience and readiness through restorative 
sleep. Sleep. 2015;38(2):173–175.
4. Benedict C, Byberg L, Cedernaes J, et al. Self-reported sleep 
disturbance is associated with Alzheimer’s disease risk in 
men. Alzheimers Dement. 2015;11(9):1090–1097.
Effective Management
of Sleep: Short-term
Effective Management
of Sleep: Long-term
• Promotes safety
• Increased alertness
• Psychological resilience
Reduced risk of developing:
• heart disease
• cancer
• type II diabetes
• Alzheimer disease
386
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
risk-taking. 53 Leaders at all levels are expected to make 
decisions, sometimes with little time or information, 
and even small decrements in decision-making ability 
(speed or quality) can put missions and lives at risk.
Beyond its direct, short-term effects on mission accomplishment, sleep loss may have long-term deleterious effects on psychological resilience and the development of psychopathology. 54,55 Conversely, regularly 
obtaining adequate sleep may play a positive role in 
enhancing resilience (ie, the ability to recover from a 
stressful event or to grow in the face of adversity). 56 
The military is concerned with training and equipping 
a ready and resilient force. MMOs play a key role 
in assuring that this goal is achieved by promoting 
healthy sleep.
Riding atop the circadian rhythm that mediates 
alertness or sleepiness across a 24-hour cycle, there 
are shorter, ultradian rhythms that mediate alertness 
on a much shorter, even moment-to-moment basis. In 
the short term, excessive subjective sleepiness can also 
be partially and momentarily masked by high motivation, excitement, exercise, and competing needs such 
as hunger or thirst. Also, it has been shown that sleepdeprived or restricted individuals will often become 
subjectively habituated to an increased sleep debt. 
Because those regions of the brain that are required for 
accurate self-assessment are impaired by sleep loss (eg, 
the prefrontal cortices), sleep-deprived or restricted 
individuals are functionally impaired and therefore 
poor judges of the extent to which they have been affected by insufficient sleep. For this reason, objective 
measures of sleep (eg, derived from wrist actigraphy) 
should be employed as part of a comprehensive alertness and sleep management program. Figure 26-3 
gives more information about the positive effects of 
managing sleep in the short term and long term. 
Figure 26-4. Shown is the Actiwatch Spectrum, used for 
objectively measuring sleep. 
Photograph courtesy of Philips Respironics, Bend, OR. 
SLEEP HYGIENE AND FATIGUE MANAGEMENT TOOLS
Several tools and technologies can be applied to 
facilitate the management of sleep and alertness in the 
field, including hardware, such as wrist actigraphy 
(Figure 26-4) for objective measurement of sleep duration, continuity, and timing, and enabling software. 
Also, pharmaceuticals such as stimulants and hypnotics may be warranted under some circumstances. Independently, each of these tools can be used effectively 
to consolidate sleep or enhance alertness and performance during waking hours. Sleep can be consolidated 
by using hypnotic medications. Stimulants such as caffeine and nicotine can enhance alertness. Performance 
model-informed work–rest scheduling can be adapted 
to support both sleep requirements and the ability to 
be alert and well rested during duty hours. 
Optimum benefit can be realized when these tools 
are used in concert, as components of a comprehensive 
sleep–alertness management system. As described in 
Wesensten, Killgore, and Balkin,57 an optimal system 
utilizes an objective measure of sleep–wake timing and 
duration for each individual operator rather than (a) 
estimates of the likely amount of sleep obtained based 
on the timing and duration of scheduled off-duty 
hours; or (b) unreliable self-reports of timing, duration, 
and quality of sleep. Currently, the best technology 
for measuring sleep timing, duration, and continuity 
in field environments is wrist actigraphy.
Wrist actigraphs are relatively unobtrusive, about 
the size and weight of a typical wristwatch. Some 
commercial models incorporate typical wristwatch 
functions. These devices use accelerometers to measure wrist movements—data from which sleep and 
wakefulness can be reliably determined and scored. 58 
Sleep–wake scoring of wrist movement data is often 
performed by the devices in real time, and these data 
are stored in memory. A typical wrist actigraph can 
collect and store approximately 6 to 8 weeks of sleep–
wake data, with the limiting factor being battery life. 
It is anticipated that even longer periods of continuous 
data collection will become available over the coming 
years, as advances in battery technology are made. 
Several commercial products are currently marketed with claims they can be used to measure sleep–
wake timing and duration. Many of these products 
387
Sleep, Rest, and Recovery
are multifunction devices that provide a measure 
of daytime physical activity level in addition to an 
estimate of nighttime sleep, but they have not been 
adequately validated. Commercial wrist actigraphs 
that are designed and marketed for the sole purpose 
of measuring sleep–wake timing and duration have 
generally been tested against polysomnography (the 
gold standard for sleep–wake scoring) and found to 
be valid and reliable.
In the optimal, comprehensive sleep–alertness management system, objective (actigraphically derived) 
sleep–wake data serve as inputs into an individualized 
mathematical model (ie, a performance prediction algorithm that “learns” an individual’s response to sleep 
loss and outputs a quantitative prediction of individual 
cognitive performance capacity). Thus, the mathematical model provides the means for interpreting the 
actigraph’s sleep–wake data in terms of its meaningfulness for individuals in the operational environment, 
the likelihood of their making errors and having accidents,59 and the rate at which they can perform useful 
mental work. 60 It also allows commanders and others 
to predict what further decrements in cognitive performance will occur if no sleep is allowed in the next 
X amount of hours and the benefits that would accrue 
if a nap of X hours were allowed at time Y. 
The 2B-Alert Web application is an open-access, 
predictive tool designed to optimize cognitive performance by analyzing the effects of sleep–wake patterns, 
time of day, and caffeine consumption. 61 This tool was 
developed in an ongoing, collaborative project at the 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and the Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software 
Applications Institute (Frederick, MD). A mobile application using this technology can predict alertness 
and cognitive performance for individuals, and its 
functionality is expandable. 62 Using such scientifically 
validated tools that predict performance and recommend interventions during continuous and sustained 
operations will actually prevent decrements in performance from reaching critical thresholds.
When operationally feasible, reversal of sleep-lossinduced alertness and performance deficits is best 
accomplished with recovery sleep (either natural or 
pharmaceutically facilitated). Although stimulants 
can improve alertness and at least some aspects of 
cognitive performance,63 it is important to keep in mind 
that they do not actually replace sleep; they only help 
delay its onset. Sleep debt continues to accrue during 
stimulant-sustained wakefulness, and in the absence 
of recovery sleep, escalating doses of stimulants are 
required to maintain alertness with increasing levels 
of sleep debt. The relative operational utility of stimulants and hypnotics are evaluated in the literature; 
operationally salient points include the following57,64,65:
 
• Equivalent doses of many stimulants such 
as d-amphetamine, modafinil, and caffeine 
have been established,57 but because of its 
relative safety, efficacy, availability, and 
widespread use and acceptance, caffeine in 
the recommended doses should at this time 
be considered the stimulant of choice for use 
in operational environments. 
 
• Sleep inducers can be used to effectively enhance sleep when the opportunity for sleep 
occurs during the daytime (when the circadian 
rhythm of alertness is in the ascending phase 
and therefore mitigates against sleep onset 
and maintenance). 
 
◦ Benzodiazepine agonists such as zolpidem are most effective for inducing and 
maintaining sleep, but “drug hangover 
effects” are possible and should be considered when these drugs are used in an 
operational environment. 
 
◦ Melatonin and synthetic melatonin receptor agonists (such as ramelteon) are generally less effective than benzodiazepine 
receptor agonists, but may be useful under 
some circumstances (eg, when the user has 
a significant sleep debt but still experiences 
difficulty sleeping during the daytime). 
In addition to informing the command about sleep 
management and optimization, MMOs must make 
decisions about the use of alertness-enhancing pharmaceuticals. It is imperative that MMOs know the 
effectiveness and possible side effects and hangover effects of these products and prescribe them accordingly.
GUIDANCE TO THE COMMANDING OFFICER
In military environments, the extent to which 
stress exposure impacts psychological functioning 
and military effectiveness is dependent in part on 
the quality of the unit leadership. 66 Chronic sleep 
restriction is among the most salient stressors faced 
by military personnel. Unit leadership plays a key 
role in ensuring all unit members get enough sleep. 
In addition to its benefits for health and well-being, 
adequate sleep is a personnel readiness issue and is 
just as important as weapon or equipment readiness. 
Leaders set the operational tempo for their unit, 
and that pace should be set to maximize individual 
388
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
and unit performance. Optimal performance can 
be achieved only when service members obtain adequate sleep. In the current conflicts, mental agility 
or “cognitive fitness” is essential for success. Sleep is 
a vital component of cognitive fitness. Commanders 
are urged to make sleep a priority for themselves and 
for their troops. Sleep should be considered an item 
of logistical resupply just like food, water, fuel, and 
ammunition, and should be addressed when planning missions.
SUMMARY
Sleep and rest, or “time off task,” provide qualitatively and physiologically distinct benefits to the 
soldier. In the short term, effective management 
of sleep in the operational environment promotes 
safety, military effectiveness, and resilience. In 
the long term, evidence is emerging that adequate 
sleep results in multiple health benefits later in life. 
Therefore, the goal should always be to maximize 
sleep quality and duration to the extent possible 
given operational realities and exigencies. This goal 
can best be achieved by implementing a comprehensive sleep–alertness management system that 
includes hardware such as wrist actigraphy (for 
objective measurement of sleep duration, continuity, and timing); software that provides performance 
predictions and guidance regarding sleep–wake 
interventions; and an armamentarium of pharmaceuticals (eg, caffeine) and hypnotics (eg, zolpidem) 
to optimize short-term control over alertness and 
sleep as needed.
SLEEP MANAGEMENT RESOURCES
The links below provide further details about the 
US military’s guidance on sleep for service members 
at all levels. They detail functional sleep management 
tools that can help ensure individual service member 
health and performance as well as unit operational 
effectiveness.
 
• 2B-Alert App –web-based demo (https://2balert-web.bhsai.org/2b-alert-web/login.xhtml)
 
• 2B-Alert App – description (https://techlinkcenter.org/technologies/2b-alert-personalized-alertness-cognitive-performance-app/)
 
• US Army Performance Triad website (https://
p3.amedd.army.mil/) 
 
• US Army Medicine’s Performance Triad training sessions for soldiers and leaders (http://
www.armymedicine.mil/Pages/PerformanceTriad-Training-Sessions.aspx)
 
• Army Techniques Publication 6-22. 5, A Leader’s Guide to Soldier Health and Fitness (http://
www.apd.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/
pdf/web/atp6_22x5.pdf) 
REFERENCES
 
1. Naitoh, P. Sleep deprivation in humans: A reappraisal. Waking and Sleeping, 1976;1:53–60. 
 
2. Tononi G, Cirelli C. Sleep function and synaptic homeostasis. Sleep Med Rev. 2006;10(1):49–62.
 
3. Akerstedt T, Folkard S. The three-process model of alertness and its extension to performance, sleep latency, and sleep 
length. Chronobiol Int. 1997;14(2):115–123.
 
4. Horne JA. Sleep loss and “divergent” thinking ability. Sleep. 1988;11(6):528–536.
 
5. Thomas M, Sing H, Belenky G, et al. Neural basis of alertness and cognitive performance impairments during sleepiness. I. Effects of 24 h of sleep deprivation on waking human regional brain activity. J Sleep Res. 2000;9(4):335–352.
 
6. Hockey GR. Compensatory control in the regulation of human performance under stress and high workload; a 
cognitive-energetical framework. Biol Psychol. 1997;45(1–3):73–93.
 
7. Fischler B. Review of clinical and psychobiological dimensions of the chronic fatigue syndrome: differentiation from 
depression and contribution of sleep dysfunctions. Sleep Med Rev. 1999;3(2):131–146.
 
8. Balkin TJ, Wesensten NJ. Differentiation of sleepiness and mental fatigue effects. In: Ackerman PL, ed. Cognitive Fatigue. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2011: 47–66.
389
Sleep, Rest, and Recovery
 
9. Lentino CV, Purvis DL, Murphy KJ, Deuster PA. Sleep as a component of the performance triad: the importance of 
sleep in a military population. US Army Med Dep J. 2013;Oct-Dec:98–108.
 10. Dinges DF, Douglas SD, Hamarman S, Zaugg L, Kapoor S. Sleep deprivation and human immune function. Adv 
Neuroimmunol. 1995;5(2):97–110.
 11. Durmer JS, Dinges DF. Neurocognitive consequences of sleep deprivation. Semin Neurol. 2005;25(1):117–129.
 12. Goel N, Rao H, Durmer JS, Dinges DF. Neurocognitive consequences of sleep deprivation. Semin Neurol. 2009;29(4):320–
339.
 13. Poe GR, Walsh CM, Bjorness TE. Cognitive neuroscience of sleep. Prog Brain Res. 2010;185:1–19.
 14. Odle-Dusseau HN, Bradley JL, Pilcher JJ. Subjective perceptions of the effects of sustained performance under sleepdeprivation conditions. Chronobiol Int. 2010;27(2):318–333.
 15. Belenky G, Wesensten NJ, Thorne DR, et al. Patterns of performance degradation and restoration during sleep restriction and subsequent recovery: a sleep dose-response study. J Sleep Res. 2003;12(1):1–12.
 16. Dinges DF, Pack F, Williams K, et al. Cumulative sleepiness, mood disturbance, and psychomotor vigilance performance decrements during a week of sleep restricted to 4–5 hours per night. Sleep. 1997;20(4):267–277.
 17. Bramoweth AD, Germain A. Deployment-related insomnia in military personnel and veterans. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 
2013;15(10):401.
 18. Breslau N, Roth T, Rosenthal L, Andreski P. Sleep disturbance and psychiatric disorders: a longitudinal epidemiological study of young adults. Biol Psychiatry. 1996;39(6):411–418.
 19. Harvey AG, Jones C, Schmidt DA. Sleep and posttraumatic stress disorder: a review. Clin Psychol Rev. 2003;23(3):377–407.
 20. Taylor MK, Hilton SM, Campbell JS, et al. Prevalence and mental health correlates of sleep disruption among military 
members serving in a combat zone. Mil Med. 2014;179(7):744–751.
 21. Wright KM, Britt TW, Bliese PD, Adler AB, Picchioni D, Moore D. Insomnia as predictor versus outcome of PTSD and 
depression among Iraq combat veterans. J Clin Psychol. 2011;67(12):1240–1258.
 22. Hoevenaar-Blom MP, Spijkerman AM, Kromhout D, van den Berg JF, Verschuren WM. Sleep duration and sleep 
quality in relation to 12-year cardiovascular disease incidence: the MORGEN study. Sleep. 2011;34(11):1487–1492.
 23. Cappuccio FP, D’Elia L, Strazzullo P, Miller MA. Quantity and quality of sleep and incidence of type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(2):414–420.
 24. Gangwisch JE, Malaspina D, Boden-Albala B, Heymsfield SB. Inadequate sleep as a risk factor for obesity: analyses 
of the NHANES I. Sleep. 2005;28(10):1289–1296.
 25. Van Cauter E, Spiegel K, Tasali E, Leproult R. Metabolic consequences of sleep and sleep loss. Sleep Med. 2008;9(Suppl 
1):S23–S28.
 26. Ferrie JE, Shipley MJ, Cappuccio FP, et al. A prospective study of change in sleep duration: associations with mortality 
in the Whitehall II cohort. Sleep. 2007;30(12):1659–1666.
 27. Kripke DF, Garfinkel L, Wingard DL, Klauber MR, Marler MR. Mortality associated with sleep duration and insomnia. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002;59(2):131–136.
 28. Hahn EA, Wang HX, Andel R, Fratiglioni L. A change in sleep pattern may predict Alzheimer disease. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. 2014;22(11):1262–1271.
390
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 29. Miller NL, Shattuck LG. Sleep patterns of young men and women enrolled at the United States Military Academy: 
results from year 1 of a 4-year longitudinal study. Sleep. 2005;28(7):837–841.
 30. Miller NL, Shattuck LG, Matsangas P. Longitudinal study of sleep patterns of United States Military Academy cadets. 
Sleep. 2010;33(12):1623–1631.
 31. Miller NL, Tvaryanas AP, Shattuck LG. Accommodating adolescent sleep-wake patterns: the effects of shifting the 
timing of sleep on training effectiveness. Sleep. 2012;35(8):1123–1136.
 32. Peterson AL, Goodie JL, Satterfield WA, Brim WL. Sleep disturbance during military deployment. Mil Med. 
2008;173(3):230–235.
 33. Luxton DD, Greenburg D, Ryan J, Niven A, Wheeler G, Mysliwiec V. Prevalence and impact of short sleep duration 
in redeployed OIF soldiers. Sleep. 2011;34(9):1189–1195.
 34. Seelig AD, Jacobson IG, Smith B, et al. Sleep patterns before, during, and after deployment to Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Sleep. 2010;33(12):1615–1622.
 35. Mental Health Advisory Team V. Mental Health Advisory Team (MHAT-V): Report. Operation Iraqi Freedom 06–08. 
Washington, DC: Office of The Surgeon General, United States Army Medical Command; Office of the Surgeon, 
Multi-National Force-Iraq; 2008. http://armymedicine.mil/Documents/Redacted1-MHATV-OIF-4-FEB-2008Report.
pdf. Accessed August 2, 2017.
 36. Joint Mental Health Advisory Team 7. Joint Mental Health Advisory Team 7 (J-MHAT 7) Report, Operation Enduring 
Freedom 2010. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General, US Army Medical Command; Office of the Command 
Surgeon HQ, USCENTCOM; Office of the Command Surgeon, US Forces Afghanistan; 2011. http://armymedicine.
mil/Documents/J_MHAT_7.pdf. Accessed August 2, 2017.
 37. Blassingame SR. Analysis of Self-Reported Sleep Patterns in a Sample of U.S. Navy Submariners Using Non-Parametric Statistics [master’s thesis]. Monterey, CA: Naval Postgraduate School; 2001. 
 38. Miller NL, Nguyen J. Working the night shift on the USS John C. Stennis: implications for enhancing warfighter effectiveness. Paper presented at: Proceedings of Aerospace Medical Association, May 2003.
 39. Lauderdale DS, Knutson KL, Yan LL, Liu K, Rathouz PJ. Self-reported and measured sleep duration: how similar are 
they? Epidemiology. 2008;19(6):838–845.
 40. Rupp TL, Wesensten NJ, Bliese PD, Balkin TJ. Banking sleep: realization of benefits during subsequent sleep restriction 
and recovery. Sleep. 2009;32(3):311–321.
 41. Gander PH, Mangie J, Van Den Berg MJ, Smith AA, Mulrine HM, Signal TL. Crew fatigue safety performance indicators for fatigue risk management systems. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2014;85(2):139–147.
 42. Rosekind MR, Gregory KB, Mallis MM. Alertness management in aviation operations: enhancing performance and 
sleep. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2006;77(12):1256–1265.
 43. Heaton KL, Rayens MK. Feedback actigraphy and sleep among long-haul truck drivers. AAOHN J. 2010;58(4):137–145.
 44. Gander P, Millar M, Webster C, Merry A. Sleep loss and performance of anaesthesia trainees and specialists. Chronobiol 
Int. 2008;25(6):1077–1091.
 45. Mysliwiec V, O’Reilly B, Polchinski J, Kwon HP, Germain A, Roth BJ. Trauma associated sleep disorder: a proposed 
parasomnia encompassing disruptive nocturnal behaviors, nightmares, and REM without atonia in trauma survivors. 
J Clin Sleep Med. 2014;10(10):1143–1148. (in exh 26-2)
 46. US Army Performance Triad Website. https://p3.amedd.army.mil/. Accessed June 1, 2018.
391
Sleep, Rest, and Recovery
 47. Roehrs TA, Randall S, Harris E, Maan R, Roth T. MSLT in primary insomnia: stability and relation to nocturnal sleep. 
Sleep. 2011;34(12):1647–1652.
 48. Lindsey DR, Dyche J. Sleep disturbance implications for modern military operations. Hum Perf Extrem Environ. 
2012;10(1).
 49. Lieberman HR, Bathalon GP, Falco CM, Kramer FM, Morgan CA, 3rd, Niro P. Severe decrements in cognition function and mood induced by sleep loss, heat, dehydration, and undernutrition during simulated combat. Biol Psychiatry. 
2005;57(4):422–429.
 50. US Army. A Leader’s Guide to Soldier Health and Fitness. Washington, DC: DA; 2016. Army Techniques Publication 6-22. 5. 
http://www.apd.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/atp6_22x5.pdf. Accessed July 18, 2018.
 51. Williams HL, Lubin A, Goodnow JJ. Impaired performance with acute sleep loss. Psychol Monogr. 1959;73(14):1–26.
 52. Torsvall L, Akerstedt T. Sleepiness on the job: continuously measured EEG changes in train drivers. Electroencephalogr 
Clin Neurophysiol. 1987;66(6):502–511.
 53. Roehrs T, Greenwald M, Roth T. Risk-taking behavior: effects of ethanol, caffeine, and basal sleepiness. Sleep. 
2004;27(5):887–893.
 54. Jones D, Gershon S, Sitaram N, Keshavan M. Sleep and depression. Psychopathology. 1987;20(Suppl 1):20–31.
 55. Roth T. The relationship between psychiatric diseases and insomnia. Int J Clin Prac Suppl. 2001(116):3–8.
 56. Germain A. Resilience and readiness through restorative sleep. Sleep. 2015;38(2):173–175.
 57. Wesensten NJ, Killgore WD, Balkin TJ. Performance and alertness effects of caffeine, dextroamphetamine, and modafinil 
during sleep deprivation. J Sleep Res. 2005;14(3):255–266.
 58. Marino M, Li Y, Rueschman MN, et al. Measuring sleep: accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of wrist actigraphy 
compared to polysomnography. Sleep. 2013;36(11):1747–1755.
 59. Raslear TG, Hursh SR, Van Dongen HP. Predicting cognitive impairment and accident risk. Prog Brain Res. 2011;190:155–
167.
 60. Van Dongen HP, Mott CG, Huang JK, Mollicone DJ, McKenzie FD, Dinges DF. Optimization of biomathematical model 
predictions for cognitive performance impairment in individuals: accounting for unknown traits and uncertain states 
in homeostatic and circadian processes. Sleep. 2007;30(9):1129–1143.
 61. Reifman J, Kumar K, Wesensten NJ, Tountas NA, Balkin TJ, Ramakrishnan S. 2B-Alert Web: An open-access tool for 
predicting the effects of sleep/wake schedules and caffeine consumption on neurobehavioral performance. Sleep. 
2016;39(12):2157–2159.
 62. 2b-alert-personalized-alertness-cognitive-performance-app. Defense TechLink Website. https://techlinkcenter.org/
technologies/2b-alert-personalized-alertness-cognitive-performance-app/. Accessed July 6, 2018.
 63. Harrison Y, Horne JA. Sleep loss and temporal memory. Q J Exp Psychol A. 2000;53(1):271–279.
 64. Bonnet MH, Balkin TJ, Dinges DF, et al. The use of stimulants to modify performance during sleep loss: a review by the 
sleep deprivation and Stimulant Task Force of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Sleep. 2005;28(9):1163–1187.
 65. Vermeeren A, Coenen AM. Effects of the use of hypnotics on cognition. Prog Brain Res. 2011;190:89–103.
 66. Britt TW, Davison J, Bliese PD, Castro CA. How leaders can influence the impact that stressors have on soldiers. Mil 
Med. 2004;169(7):541–545.
392
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
