347
Environmental Extremes: Space
Chapter 24
ENVIRONMENTAL EXTREMES: SPACE
RICHARD A. SCHEURING, DO, MS*; JOSEF F. SCHMID, MD†; and J.D. POLK, DO‡ 
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
MILITARY HISTORY 
MILITARY APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY
The Space Environment
Physiologic Effects
THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE 
OPTIMIZATION IN SPACE
Role of the Military Medical Officer
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
SUMMARY
*Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army Reserve; Associate Professor, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
†Major General, Medical Corps, US Air Force Reserve; NASA, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas
‡Chief Medical Officer, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC
348
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The environment outside of Earth’s atmosphere 
(space) is regarded by some as the future battlefield. 
Developed nations rely on space-based assets such as 
satellites to conduct day-to-day business, including 
communications, navigation, and financial transactions, to name a few. Military use of space for surveillance and reconnaissance has existed for decades. More 
recently the use of low Earth orbit (LEO) to conduct 
tactical operations has been proposed. Warfighters on 
this future battlefield will confront a variety of physiologic and environmental challenges. Knowledge of 
the challenges that confront service members, and 
strategies to mitigate against stressors that impact optimal performance, are essential for the military medical 
officer (MMO). This chapter specifically addresses the 
environmental challenges of space flight as applied 
to today’s warfighter, with a focus on enhancing performance in these settings. Specifically discussed are 
core definitions applied to these stressors, relevant 
military history and epidemiology, applicable applied physiology, and detailed prevention strategies. 
Specific guidance is provided to assist the MMO in the 
identification and prevention of environmental stress 
as applied to service members.
DEFINITIONS
Common terminology related to environmental 
challenges in space is shown in Tables 24-1 and 24-2. 
First, basic and specific applied physiologic definitions 
are provided to assist the MMO in interpreting relevant 
literature and established military guidance. Next are 
terms associated with common medical conditions and 
injuries in this environment. The MMO must have a 
clear understanding of this terminology in the policy 
and literature to ultimately optimize service member 
performance.
MILITARY HISTORY 
During World War II, Eugene Sanger of the German Herman Goring Institute developed a theoretical 
“space bomber” that would be capable of reaching 
suborbital altitudes to extend its range and deliver a 
weapons payload to New York City. Years later, the Soviet Union began testing the MiG-105, a military space 
plane that would make use of “skip-glide” suborbital 
flight to deliver a payload over long distances. The 
successful launch of the Soviet Sputnik on October 4, 
1957, from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan 
officially started the Soviet-US space race in public 
awareness. 
The US military, with the help of German rocket 
scientists who came to America after World War 
II, most notably Wernher von Braun, had spent the 
previous decade developing intercontinental ballistic 
missile systems for weapons payloads. Von Braun 
and colleagues had also envisioned developing a 
manned space vehicle to support military operations. 
By late 1957, the US Air Force had incorporated their 
concepts into its program to develop a hypersonic 
“space plane” that would achieve speeds in excess of 
Mach 10 after being dropped from a heavy bomber 
and igniting rocket engines. The delta-winged Boeing 
X-20A Dyna-Soar would be capable of landing on a 
runway after carrying out suborbital military reconnaissance, satellite maintenance, and enemy satellite interdiction. However, it was canceled in 19631 
when Congress deemed the project lacked a relevant 
military mission and cost outweighed its benefits as 
a research platform. Several military space designs 
followed the Dyna-Soar program, but each failed to 
achieve its intended goal of supporting a manned 
space mission. The culmination of these efforts was 
the US Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory (MOL) 
(Figure 24-1). 
The MOL was announced to the public in 1963 as a 
general research program designed to “demonstrate 
the military value of a man in space.”2 Intended to be 
operational by the early 1970s, the program’s actual 
purpose was reconnaissance of ground-based Soviet 
and Chinese military facilities. Astronauts would 
launch in a modified NASA Gemini spacecraft with the 
pressurized MOL attached as a single-use laboratory 
accessible through a hatch. Both would launch on a 
Titan IIIC booster rocket from Vandenberg Air Force 
Base in California to a polar orbital inclination (ie, flight 
orientation over the Earth) with a perigee of 89 nautical miles. Spending up to 40 days in space, astronauts 
would operate a sophisticated optical system capable 
of high-resolution still and video images of military 
targets on the ground, according to plans. During 
development, however, the MOL rapidly exceeded 
its budget. Analysis determined that unmanned spy 
satellites could match or surpass the capabilities of 
the MOL project. As the Vietnam War drained the 
nation’s defense budget, the program was canceled 
in mid-1969. 
349
Environmental Extremes: Space
TABLE 24-1
GENERAL APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY TERMINOLOGY
Term 
Definition
Armstrong’s line 
Above an altitude of 18,900 m (63,000 ft) the total atmospheric pressure equals the 
vapor pressure of water at body temperature, ie, the ambient pressure is 5% that at 
sea level and the boiling point of water is now 98. 6°F. Clinically, blood and body 
fluids will “boil.”
Microgravity (µg) 
The result of balanced centrifugal and gravitational force vectors of an orbiting 
vehicle simulating the lack of true gravity. Not synonymous with zero-gravity.
Suborbital 
Any flight outside Earth’s atmosphere with a maximum flight speed below the 
orbital velocity, thereby preventing a vehicle from completing one orbit.
Low earth orbit (LEO) 
An orbit around Earth with an altitude between 160 km (99 miles) (orbital period of 
about 88 minutes) and 2,000 km (1,200 miles) (orbital period of about 127 minutes).
Geosynchronous earth orbit 
An Earth orbit located at 35,786 km (22,236 miles) above Earth’s equator, which allows satellites to match Earth’s rotation.
Solar particle event (SPE) 
An injection of energetic electrons, protons, alpha particles, and heavier particles into 
interplanetary space following a highly concentrated, explosive release of energy 
from the sun.
Galactic cosmic radiation (GCR) 
Energy that originates outside the solar system, consisting of ionized atoms ranging 
from a single proton up to a uranium nucleus.
Extravehicular activity (EVA) 
Any activity done by an astronaut outside a spacecraft beyond the Earth’s appreciable atmosphere.
Extravehicular mobility unit (EMU) 
An independent anthropomorphic spacesuit that provides environmental protection, mobility, life support, and communications for astronauts performing extravehicular activity in Earth orbit.
High-performance jet aircraft 
Jet planes capable of high-g acceleration, velocities approaching or surpassing the 
speed of sound, and operating altitudes above 9,144 m (30,000 ft) above sea level.
Hypercapnia 
A condition of abnormally elevated carbon dioxide (CO2) levels in the blood.
Hypobaric 
Characterized by less than normal pressure or weight; applies to gases under less 
than sea level atmospheric pressure of 14. 7 psi or 760 mm Hg.
Karman line 
The boundary between Earth’s atmosphere and the edge of outer space, generally 
100 km (62. 5 miles) above sea level. The atmosphere at this altitude is too rarified to 
support aeronautical flight thus vehicles require rocket propulsion for maneuverability.
Mean sea level barometric pressure 
Measured as 1 atmosphere (atm), 760 mm Hg, 14. 7 psi, or 101. 3 kPa.
Perigee 
Point in orbit nearest to the center of the Earth.
The military then shifted its interest to unmanned 
space capabilities with the development of robust 
satellite systems for reconnaissance and communications. The tactical military utility of these 
systems was virtually nonexistent, however; most 
were purely strategic assets. In early 1971, the US 
Navy Research Laboratory created the Timation 
(Time-Navigation) Development Plan, based on the 
Space Surveillance System technology developed 
earlier in the decade. This capability was the basis 
for future highly classified navigation systems used 
in military operations, most notably the global positioning system (GPS). 3 
In contrast to the military efforts, civilian manned 
space missions dominated the late 1960s and early to 
mid-1970s. The six Apollo lunar surface missions fulfilled President John F. Kennedy’s vision of landing a 
man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth. 
The Soviets abandoned lunar aspirations for establishing space “stations” capable of sustaining human 
350
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 24-2 
SPACE ALTERATION/ILLNESS/INJURY TERMINOLOGY 
Term 
Definition
Circadian desynchronization 
Disturbances in the normal sleep cycle that result when external environmental 
cues conflict with the internal clock.
Ebullism 
Formation of water vapor bubbles in the tissues brought on by an extreme reduction 
in barometric pressure if the body is exposed to pressures above Armstrong’s line.
Space-adaptation back pain (SABP) 
Musculoskeletal pain in the lumbar spine region that occurs after initial exposure 
to µg and persists for 48 to 72 hours.
Space motion sickness 
A syndrome ranging in symptom severity that includes nausea, vomiting, global 
headache, anorexia, and fatigue after initial exposure to µg. A self-limited disorder, the symptoms typically resolve within the first 24 to 48 hours of space flight.
Figure 24-1. Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), an evolution of the earlier “Blue Gemini” program, which was 
conceived to be an all-Air Force parallel of NASA’s Gemini 
efforts. US Air Force photo.
Reproduced from: http://www.nationalmuseum.af.mil/
Visit/Museum-Exhibits/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/195891/
manned-orbiting-laboratory/.
by President Richard Nixon in 1972, was built with 
the understanding that military payloads and crew 
could be transported into space to support missions 
for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The 
space shuttle provided crewed returns from LEO 
after launching from Kennedy Space Center in 
Florida. Beginning with the first classified Department of Defense (DoD) payload on STS-4 in 1982, 
the space shuttle flew nine classified missions for 
the DoD. 4–6 Eight of these missions were considered 
“dedicated” military missions, flown by military astronauts. 2–4 The NRO, in conjunction with the US Air 
Force, built a launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force 
Base with the intent that the space shuttle or other 
manned vehicles could be launched to polar orbits 
for high-orbital inclination, placing the spacecraft 
orbital path over Russia. 6 
The military had chosen its first group of space 
shuttle astronauts, known as manned spaceflight 
engineers (MSEs), in 1979. From the initial class of 13, 
only one MSE, Colonel Gary Payton, flew in space, 
on STS-51C in 1985. This mission deployed an Air 
Force inertial upper-stage spy satellite as a separate 
spacecraft from the shuttle payload bay. This permitted the payload to launch from the shuttle (in LEO) 
to a higher altitude geosynchronous orbit, enabling 
better visibility of the Earth. From 1985 to 1992, several 
classified DoD space shuttle missions deployed the 
Defense Satellite Systems, which included the ability 
to perform communications, surveillance, reconnaissance, weather and environmental monitoring, and 
nuclear missile launch detection. 4,6 After the Space 
Shuttle Challenger accident in January 1986, however, 
the NRO and Air Force abandoned the manned military space program development at Vandenberg and 
returned to unmanned satellite deployment missions 
on Atlas and Titan launch vehicles. 
presence in space for extended periods of time. After 
the Apollo missions, the United States developed its 
own long-duration space station, Skylab, in 1973. The 
Skylab science missions ranged from 28 to 84 days and 
provided significant insight into the effects of microgravity (µg) on human physiology. The Apollo-Soyuz 
mission, the first joint US-Soviet mission in space, 
followed in 1975. This brief mission represented the 
beginning of an international collaboration in space 
that continues today.
In 1981 NASA began launching the Space Transportation System (STS), or space shuttle, missions. 
The STS, initially approved as a public space vehicle 
351
Environmental Extremes: Space
By the 1980s, space-based communications, weather 
satellites, and reconnaissance satellites had matured 
to add tactical utility to military operations in Central 
America. During the Persian Gulf War in 1991, GPS navigation satellites provided highly accurate navigation 
data aiding US and allied military forces in the region. 
Also, “smart weapons” began appearing in numbers 
that could make a measurable tactical impact. Cold War 
strategic systems were also modified to assist tactical 
forces, beginning a trend that continues today. These 
systems were refined during the bombing campaign 
in Kosovo in the late 1990s; in 5 short years the use of 
precision munitions led to highly accurate weapons that 
resulted in few nonmilitary casualties. The conflicts in 
the Middle East in the first decade of the 21st century 
made use of standardized space-based systems throughout the armed services, leading to unprecedented warfighting capabilities in many theaters of operation.
In December 2006, Popular Science published an 
article called “Semper Fly: Marines in Space,” detailing a plan to develop a vehicle that could transport 
up to 13 marines to a military objective anywhere in 
the world from the United States in 2 hours via suborbital spaceflight. 7 The Marine Corps envisioned using 
suborbital space to develop a capability for greater 
operational speed and flexibility than conventional 
jets, called Small Unit Space Transport, or “Sustain.” 
Included in this vision was the ability to deploy forces 
outside the spacecraft at altitudes considerably above 
Armstrong’s line (see Table 24-1) to parachute to a 
ground-based objective. This goal was driven in part 
by expediency and to circumvent obtaining permission 
to use sovereign nation airspace, an issue between the 
United States and nations positioned along the space 
shuttles’ orbital track back in the early 1980s. 8 While 
these technical and tactical benefits may be achievable 
in the near future, careful consideration of the space environment’s effect on human physiology and function 
must be considered to optimize human performance 
outside Earth’s atmosphere. 
MILITARY APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY
Physiologic adaptation to µg and partial-gravity environments involves the following systems: 
neurovestibular, cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, 
immune, neuroophthalmological, hematologic, 
gynecologic, and behavioral/performance. First, a 
basic understanding of the space environment is 
necessary to understand its physiologic impacts 
on humans. 
The Space Environment
A spacecraft orbiting the Earth requires adequate 
orbital velocity carrying it into space to overcome 
Earth’s gravitational pull. The resultant vector keeps 
the vehicle “falling” around the Earth as the planet 
surface is constantly curving underneath it. The acceleration forces cancel each other out, resulting in 
µg. Outer space, that is, the environment beyond 
the Karman line (see Table 24-1), is the most hostile 
environment humans have ever encountered (Figure 
24-2). Outside a pressurized vessel, an unprotected 
person would suffer near instantaneous death from 
ebullism and anoxia. In the absence of Earth’s protective atmosphere, near +/- 250°F temperature extremes 
exist between darkness and sunlight. A near vacuum 
where only a few hydrogen molecules exist, the thermosphere has an ambient pressure of roughly 10-12 mm 
Hg /3. 2 × 10-2 Pa. Radiation (primarily charged alpha 
particles liberated by solar flares, ultraviolet radiation, 
and x-rays) and heavy charged particles from galactic 
sources are ubiquitous outside the protective layer of 
the atmosphere and geomagnetosphere. Despite the 
harsh environment of space, humans have lived and 
thrived for over 5 decades outside of Earth’s protective shell. Today’s space vehicles orbiting in LEO are 
designed to maintain a habitable interior with sea-level 
ambient pressure and gas combinations, temperature 
and humidity at comfortable levels, and adequate 
lighting and protection from harmful solar radiation. 
In addition, nearly instant two-way audiovisual communications support communication with astronauts 
and ground command and control of the vehicle. 
Physiologic Effects
Neurovestibular
Physiologically, balance and coordination are 
among the first systems affected in space. In µg, the 
otoliths are off-loaded, contributing to the temporary 
loss of spatial orientation and space motion sickness 
that astronauts experience early on in spaceflight. 9,10 
All humans are affected to some degree with mild 
loss of neuromuscular coordination, nausea, and 
vomiting soon after orbital insertion. Reaction times 
are initially slowed but quickly adapt to the novel µg 
environment. 11 Upon return to the 1-g environment, 
proprioceptive challenges and loss of visual depth 
perception from spaceflight deconditioning last 48 
to 72 hours. 
 On the lunar surface following a 4. 3-day transit 
from Earth, the Apollo astronauts generally felt “a little 
352
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
wobbly” upon stepping on the moon. They attributed 
this sensation to the one-sixth Earth gravity environment and aft center of gravity of the lunar extravehicular mobility unit (EMU) rather than neurovestibular 
dysfunction (Figure 24-3). 12 Coordination seemed to 
improve steadily during the first couple of hours on the 
lunar surface. During three of the six lunar landings, 
Figure 24-2. The edge of space. Fly-around view of the International Space Station (ISS) taken by an STS-119 crewmember 
after the undocking of the orbiter Discovery. NASA photo 
ID: S119E010500. 
Reproduced from: https://images.nasa.gov/detailss119e010500.html.
Figure 24-3. Apollo 11 crewmember Buzz Aldrin, Jr. Crew 
members countered the suit aft center of gravity by leaning 
forward. NASA photo ID: AS11-40-5874.
Reproduced from: https://images.nasa.gov/detailsas11-40-5874.html.
blowing lunar dust caused loss of horizontal reference 
cues, complicating piloting during vehicle descent and 
resulting in longer descent times and deviation from 
the proposed landing site. Retrospectively, the Apollo 
crews stated that spatial disorientation did not play 
a factor in vehicle control. Whether environmental 
factors or loss of piloting proficiency played a role is 
unclear.
In LEO, correlations between mission length and 
landings outside (or nearly outside) planned parameters (landing too fast, too slow, or too hard) have been 
evaluated in operation and simulated environments. 9–11 
In space missions lasting between 5 and 14 days, the 
commanders and pilots had minimal perturbation of 
neurovestibular function. Consequently, neuromuscular motor control to carry out complex landing operations was minimally impacted. 9 Actual landing performance shows much greater variability than simulator 
performance parameters, but was within the margin 
of safety for short-duration missions. The implication 
is that short-duration spaceflight has a minor effect on 
pilot performance, but longer-duration µg exposures 
may complicate this dynamic phase of flight.
Cardiovascular 
Cardiovascular changes that occur in space are 
most evident in cephalic fluid shift. On Earth, gravity 
exerts a downward force to keep blood flowing to the 
capacitance venous system in the lower body. Cephalad migration of nearly 2 L of intravascular volume 
occurs within hours of exposure to µg, when the lack 
of gravity causes blood and body fluid to be redistributed toward the chest and upper body. Astronauts 
experience nasal congestion, facial plethora, and a dull 
sense of taste. 13,14 This “puffy face–bird leg” syndrome 
persists throughout the µg exposure to some degree. 
Initially the relative increase in cardiac pre-load results 
in diuresis, and the crew will urinate frequently for 
the first 24 to 36 hours of spaceflight. The crew then 
remains euvolemic in µg for the mission duration. As 
the lower extremities are minimally used for locomotion (the “arms become the legs” in space), there is 
consequent relative minor atrophy in cardiac muscle 
size and stroke volume. Heart rate does not change 
significantly, so cardiac output is naturally reduced 
up to 15% to 20%.
To determine the extent of cardiovascular deconditioning in µg and how it might potentially impact 
physical performance such as extravehicular activity 
(EVA), researchers have measured on-orbit maximum 
power outputs and oxygen uptake during exercise 
(V̇ o2max) in astronauts relative to their preflight baseline 
measurements. 15 Exercise performance, as measured 
353
Environmental Extremes: Space
by V̇ o2max, is initially reduced in µg. Within the first 
3 weeks of spaceflight, a pronounced deconditioning 
effect on aerobic capacity occurs without exercise countermeasures. The reduction in aerobic performance 
appears to peak at about 3 weeks in-flight, then slowly 
improves with use of a treadmill and cycle ergometer. 
The cardiovascular adaptations to µg persist until 
reintroduction to the Earth’s 1g environment. Changes 
in the heart muscle, vascular reflexes, and redistribution of body fluids during flight strongly predispose 
crew to orthostatic hypotension post-landing to varying degrees. Upon return to the 1g Earth environment, 
the reduced circulating blood volume experienced by 
the crew in space results in decreased standing blood 
pressure without adequate commensurate increase in 
heart rate to maintain cardiac output. This condition, 
known as orthostatic intolerance, varies in severity but 
is present to some degree in most returning astronauts. 
The incidence for short-duration (less than 30 days) 
and long-duration missions ranges from 20% to 67% 
of crewmembers. Symptoms range from dizziness 
and lightheadedness to transient syncope, but usually 
resolve in 18 to 24 hours after landing. 16
Musculoskeletal
Physical performance in space after the initial adaptation period of 24 to 72 hours is minimally impaired 
from cardiovascular alterations. However, there is 
potential operational impact from the musculoskeletal changes that occur in µg. Astronauts experience 
decreased upper body strength and stamina for EVA to 
some degree, depending on preflight fitness level and 
inflight training. Typical EVAs range in duration from 
6 to 8 hours. During this time outside the spacecraft, 
astronauts manipulate equipment and move along the 
structure using mostly their hands, upper extremities, 
and core musculature. Crew members have described 
the upper body exertion during EVA as moderately 
physically demanding, depending on the task. 
The musculoskeletal system undergoes significant 
adaptation in space in the form of bone and muscle 
loss due to the absence of gravitational loading. Prior 
to the use of the advanced resistive exercise device 
(ARED) on the International Space Station (ISS) in 
2010, bone density losses of 1% to 2. 4% per month 
in the lower extremities and spine were measured 
in astronauts. 17 The skeletal changes and loss of total 
body calcium have been noted in both humans and 
animals exposed to µg from 7 to 237 days. Using dual 
absorptiometry x-ray to measure bone mineral density 
(BMD), LeBlanc et al determined that BMD losses 
were specific to weight-bearing bones. Specifically, 
monthly losses of 1% at the lumbar spine and 1. 5% 
at the femoral neck have been documented prior 
to the use of on-orbit resistive exercise training. 18 
Astronauts returning from long-duration space 
flight have also demonstrated persistent loss of 
trabecular bone, despite return of density to preflight 
baseline levels. 19 Recently, finite element analysis 
and quantitative computed tomography have been 
used to assess bone architecture, in contrast to bone 
density measurements. 20 These methods may be more 
predictive of future fracture risk post-flight. 
The potential clinical effects of long-duration space 
flight on calcium metabolism include the development of kidney stones due to increased urine and 
fecal calcium, as well as possible post-flight fractures. 
Fourteen post-flight kidney stones have been reported 
in short-duration space shuttle astronauts,21 although 
no in-flight episodes of renal lithiasis have occurred in 
US astronauts to date. There have been 54 post-flight 
fractures among US crew members, but aerospace 
medicine experts attribute none of them to in-flight 
bone loss. Research continues on the risk of post-flight 
fracture. 
Consistent with the skeletal adaptations, muscle 
morphologic change and fiber loss are evident in 
space compared to baseline preflight levels. Atrophy 
of the antigravity muscles (thigh, calf) and decrease 
in leg strength (approximately 20%–30%), with extensor muscles more affected than flexor muscles, 
have been measured in short- and long-duration 
astronauts. Data from rats carried aboard spacecraft 
showed an increase in the number of type II (fasttwitch) muscle fibers (those that are useful for quick 
body movements but more prone to fatigue). This 
effect has been confirmed with muscle biopsy in 
US astronaut volunteers. 22 Lower extremity muscle 
strength and size and overall decrease in leg volume 
and body mass were common prior to the current 
on-orbit exercise program using the ARED. 
There are also significant changes to the axial 
skeleton in µg. Changes in the spine and antigravity 
muscles associated with µg exposure include lumbar 
back pain, fatigue, muscle stiffness and soreness, weakness, and atrophy in the core stabilizing muscles. 23–27 
Between 53% and 68% of astronauts experience some 
degree of lumbar back pain on orbit, known as spaceadaptation back pain (SABP), ranging from mild to, 
in 10%, excruciating. 28 In-flight, there is dramatic 
postural change of the cervical and lumber spine with 
loss of lordosis from lack of gravity and the stretching 
of tendons and ligaments. Consequently there is an 
average increase in on-orbit height by 2 to 6 cm. SABP 
etiology is unknown but may relate to intervertebral 
disk and vertebral end-plate changes, thoracolumbar 
myofascial changes, alterations in the facet joint, and 
354
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
stretching of the anterior longitudinal ligament. SABP 
peaks in severity by 48 to 72 hours and subsides within 
the first week on orbit. Interestingly, the occurrence 
of SABP and post-flight herniated nucleus pulposus 
(HNP) appear to be inversely related.
As of this writing, post-flight HNP has occurred in 
47 US astronauts, with 14 events occurring within the 
first year of return (Figure 24-4). 26,28 The mechanism of 
the changes to the annular fibrosis that increases the risk 
of HNP is not well understood. The condition is equally 
common among short- and longer-duration crew, suggesting an unknown factor that injures the spine during 
µg exposure. 26,29 Spacecraft type at landing (eg, space 
shuttle, Apollo Command Module, Soyuz) does not appear to be a factor in post-landing HNP occurrence. 26,28 
Many experts speculate there may be a dynamic period 
of stabilization of the annulus in the first few hours of 
return to 1g. In space shuttle crew members who were 
not significantly orthostatic on landing and were able 
to stand and ambulate, the sudden axial loading may 
injure the annulus, causing annular tears that predispose the person to HNP. Deconditioned crew returning 
from long-duration missions on the ISS are generally 
unable to stand for a couple of hours and subsequently 
remain supine until their orthostasis subsides. Therefore, maintaining supine position post-flight for a brief 
period of time may reduce the risk of developing HNP. 
The possible contribution of loss of the spinal stabilizer 
muscles (eg, the multifidus) in long-duration astronauts, 
as assessed by pre- and post-flight magnetic resonance 
imaging and functional muscle testing, is also being considered in astronauts with clinical symptomatology. 29
Immune System 
The immune system has subtle responses to short- 
and long-duration µg exposure. White blood cell function is impaired. Lymphocyte function is depressed 
in at least 50% of space crew members. Decreased 
lymphocyte response to mitogens in cosmonauts after 
space flight was reported for the first time in the early 
1970s by Russian immunologists. 30 Among the possible 
causes of space flight-induced alterations in immune 
responses are exposure to µg, physical and psychological stress, exposure to radiation, and potentially more as 
yet undetermined causes. Delayed wound healing has 
been reported anecdotally. 31 Astronauts have described 
slowed healing of small skin wounds, up to a couple of 
weeks for paper cuts on their fingertips. There are also 
clinical implications from latent virus reactivation such 
as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and herpes simplex. Blood 
titers have confirmed elevations in EBV and cytomegalovirus in crew, with recrudescence of their lesions. 
Neuroophthalmological
In the last decade, NASA has discovered many 
physiologic changes that have occurred in long- duration spaceflight that were unknown when spaceflight 
experience was limited to short-duration missions. Recently, changes in the neuroophthalmological system 
due to increased intracranial pressure (ICP) have been 
discovered in astronauts performing both short- and 
long-duration space missions. 14 ICP changes on orbit 
appear to affect men more than women. It is unknown 
whether this effect is secondary to the fluid shift, 
vascular compliance within the cerebral vasculature, 
increased blood flow to the organs that make cerebral 
spinal fluid, hampered reabsorption and venous distribution of the cerebral spinal fluid by the arachnoid villi, 
or elevated ambient CO2 levels. These factors combined 
may be the source of increased ICP. The recent discovery that lymphatics have a prominent role in cerebral 
fluid dynamics may clarify the etiology. Whatever the 
cause, there are differences between space-induced ICP 
and the terrestrial condition. Whereas patients with 
pseudotumor cerebri on Earth have headache and are 
typically female and often overweight, astronauts at 
risk do not exhibit any of these characteristics on orbit. 
Although the outcome or end state of vision change 
may be similar, the mechanism is not related to terrestrial ICP pathology. 
Good vision is necessary for reading and operational assessment, and the eyes are also the primary 
organ for position sense on orbit. However, dynamic 
changes take place in vision over a period of time on 
orbit. Currently, low-grade papilledema or choroidal 
Figure 24-4. Number of herniated nucleus pulposus (HNP) 
events based upon the time following the mission in years.
Data source: Johnston SL, Campbell M, Scheuring RA, 
Feiveson A. Increased incidence of herniated nucleus 
pulposus among US astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med. 
2012;81(6):566–574. 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Time Post Landing (years)
Number of HNP Events
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
355
Environmental Extremes: Space
folds are the manifestation of increased ICP on orbit, 
leading to one or more diopters of shift in visual 
acuity, which may be partly secondary to changes in 
increased ICP and its subsequent impact of the optic 
nerves. There is also a visual change in smooth pursuit 
or tracking of an object, known as saccades, in which 
the eyes have a jerky pursuit of the object progressing 
through a field of view. This effect may be secondary to loss of practice in using the eyes in tracking in 
space while simultaneously receiving neurovestibular 
signals. Saccades may have implications for human 
factors designs for landing instruments on exploration 
missions, docking and range finding of vehicles after 
prolonged space exposure, or target tracking in the 
military context. 
Hematologic
Hematologic changes after short-duration µg 
exposures were noted on routine blood analysis during space shuttle missions. 32,33A relative reduction in 
circulating red blood cell mass has been documented, 
reflected in a 7% to 14% decrease in hematocrit levels 
relative to preflight baselines. This so-called “space 
flight anemia” is thought to be due to a sequestration of young erythrocytes by the spleen in a process 
known as neocytolysis. Despite the reductions in red 
cell numbers, crew performance does not appear to 
have been impacted. 
Gynecologic
The physiologic effects of short-duration µg exposure on gynecologic function have been documented 
during space shuttle missions. These reports have 
confirmed that menstrual efflux and required hygiene 
measures are similar to those experienced on Earth. 
Oral contraceptives use for short-duration missions 
has been encouraged because this method offers the 
opportunity to reduce the volume of menstrual efflux and the capability to shift the menstrual cycle 
to avoid menses on orbit, or to totally suppress menstruation. In addition, oral contraceptives can help 
maintain bone density, particularly in individuals 
who exercise to the point of reduced estrogen levels and amenorrhea. Conception has apparently 
not been impaired in female astronauts following 
short- or long-duration µg exposures; several female 
astronauts have become pregnant and delivered 
healthy full-term babies post-flight. 14 
Behavioral
Psychological stress, as manifested in crew mood, morale, and circadian rhythm, has occurred to some degree 
during both short- and long-duration missions. On-orbit 
environmental factors that contribute to changes in crew 
morale include temperature, noise, odors, the relatively 
dry atmosphere, limited dietary choices in early space 
shuttle missions, and lack of family contact. 25 Symptoms 
of fatigue and irritability have been well documented, 
depending in part on the flight plan, including high work 
load and alterations in normal sleep patterns. 
To maintain a stable altitude in LEO, a spacecraft 
needs to maintain a velocity of 17,500 mph. Consequently, “sunrise” and “sunset” occur every 90 minutes. The crew is subjected to fixed 6. 5- to 8-hour sleep 
periods in an unusual sleep environment where loss 
of normal proprioceptive cues make falling asleep and 
maintaining sleep challenging. Head restraints are often 
needed to keep the head secured to a pillow, and loud 
background noise (ambient levels are 62–65 dBA) requires 
noise-cancelling headsets. More recently, the ambient 
lighting frequencies (blue-green wavelength) and elevation in local CO2 levels have been implicated in insomnia. 
All these factors have resulted in poor sleep quality 
and reduced sleep duration. 34 Preliminary analyses 
indicate sleep on 2-week shuttle missions (n = 44) 
averages 6 hours per night, significantly less than the 
8 hours recommended by the Institute of Medicine. 
Analyses of a small number of ISS participants (n = 10) 
further indicate that sleep continues to be reduced in 
space in duration similar to that found during shuttle 
missions. Also, crew members during ISS missions regularly have schedule shifts to their work/rest schedules 
to meet operational demands of the mission, such as 
visiting vehicle operations, EVA, or repair of hardware 
malfunctions. Taken together, these environmental 
stressors can lead to circadian desynchronization resulting in sleep loss and daytime fatigue. 34,35 
THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION IN SPACE
Role of the Military Medical Officer
The MMO supporting the space mission will be 
expected to have strong working knowledge of space 
physiology and operational space medicine. He or she 
will serve as subject matter expert providing recommendations to the commander for prevention of space 
environmental illness or injuries, assist in the diagnosis 
and treatment of such injuries (utilizing telemedicine), 
and determine when crew return to duty is appropriate following any sick leave. As in most of military 
medicine, the best treatment strategy for all potential 
356
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
environmental injuries/illness is primary prevention. 
Primary prevention is the cornerstone of optimizing 
human performance in extreme environments, and 
space operations are no different. Table 24-3 lists 
evidence-based strategies for specific risk factors or 
challenges to optimize warfighter performance in the 
extreme environment of space.
Human spaceflight provides unique challenges to 
human performance. Human physiology and function 
require significant support to adapt to the fluid shifts, 
neurovestibular dysfunction, musculoskeletal deconditioning, and circadian degradation associated with 
living in space. Radiation exposure, air quality, ambient pressure and gas component changes, toxicologic 
exposures, and loss of circadian rhythm control can 
affect every body system; these effects must be well understood by the MMO. In LEO, astronauts generally do 
not sustain radiation exposure levels that pose clinical 
risk for illness or injury. However, once missions extend 
beyond LEO and the protective shell of the geomagnetosphere and Van Allen belts, radiation effects on health 
become a major issue. The spacecraft must shield its 
inhabitants from radiation in these missions. 36 
Astronauts engaged in EVAs must have medical 
oversight to prevent decompression sickness as well 
as monitor for thermal, ocular, and musculoskeletal 
injury. Isolation, interpersonal stress, and the real 
threat of death provide further impact to sleep patterns and immune systems. Basic human needs must 
be met within the constraints posed by living in a 
relatively small, confined environment, and the MMO 
will need to understand the effects of the habitable 
vehicle volume on crew health and performance. 37 
Countermeasures include nutrition, exercise, medication, and psychological support, along with correction 
of environmental anomalies. It is therefore imperative 
that military space operations employ physicians and 
medics fully trained in space physiology, mission operations, and space biomedical engineering to ensure 
mission success. 
Sleep and Rest
During the on-orbit phase of each mission, a large 
team of flight controllers— experts in individual 
engineering areas related to spacecraft control, environmental monitoring, power generation, attitude 
control, and EVA—will be supporting the crew and 
vehicle in space from the operations control center, 
also known as “mission control.”38 Highly detailed 
and operationally exacting work are hallmarks of 
space operations both on and off the ground. The 
space MMO must be cognizant of the impact to 
operations presented by the mission on the crew in 
space and the flight control team members on the 
ground. Physiologic and psychological effects of high 
work load, fatigue, and sleep deprivation often go 
unrecognized during mission operations but have the 
potential to affect crew and flight controller performance. Situational awareness of how medical issues 
could impact all phases of the space mission, and all 
operators, both on and above the Earth, should be the 
goal of the space MMO.
Preservation of optimal human performance in 
novel space environments will need to address changes to the circadian rhythm (or the “daily biological 
internal clock”), which regulates a circadian rhythm 
of 24. 2 hours a day. Light serves as the strongest external stimulus for maintaining circadian alignment 
to Earth’s 24-hour day/night cycle. Melatonin, an 
endogenous hormone secreted by the pineal gland, 
serves as the biological “darkness” signal. When 
darkness occurs, melatonin is produced and released 
into the blood. Melatonin levels are high at night, 
resulting in decreased alertness and increased sleep 
inertia. Melatonin levels stay elevated through the 
night, then fall back to low daytime levels (which are 
barely detectable). 
Bright light inhibits the release of melatonin. Even 
if the pineal gland is “switched on” by the circadian 
clock, it will not produce melatonin unless the person is 
in a dark or very dimly lit environment. Light therapy 
for circadian desynchrony has recently been implemented for astronauts on orbit and mission-control 
flight operators working the night shifts to maintain 
alertness. 34 Evidence shows that bright light hastens 
schedule shifting, improves circadian entrainment, 
Figure 24-5. Extravehicular activity (EVA) on the International Space Station. S-116 MS Curbeam, Jr, and Fuglesang work 
on S1 Truss during EVA 1. NASA photo ID: STS116E05983.
Reproduced from: https://images.nasa.gov/detailss116e05982.html.
357
Environmental Extremes: Space
TABLE 24-3
TARGETED RISK FACTOR/CHALLENGES AND EVIDENCE-BASED STRATEGIES TO OPTIMIZE 
PERFORMANCE IN SPACE
Performance Risk Factor or Challenge 
Human Performance Optimization Strategy
Space motion sickness 
Antiemetic medication; preflight adaptation training; work/rest/hydration
Circadian desynchrony 
Light therapy; melatonin; short-acting nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics
Muscle and bone loss 
Preflight exercise program and in-flight aerobic and resistive exercise 
Cardiac deconditioning 
Preflight exercise program and in-flight aerobic and resistive exercise
Space adaptation back pain 
NSAIDs, short-acting muscle relaxants, and spinal mobilization/compression
Extravehicular activity (EVA) 
Oxygen pre-breathe; aspirin therapy
On-orbit urinary retention 
Judicious use of anticholinergics; frequent voiding early in mission; trained 
in self-catheterization
Increased intracranial pressure 
Maintain cabin Pco2 below 3. 00 mm Hg
Radiation exposure 
Monitor daily radiation doses with active and passive dosimeters; high-density 
polyethylene shielding
Acute cabin decompression 
Immediate isolation of leaking element; calculation of rate of leak and remaining time in orbit; oxygen supplementation
On-orbit visual changes 
Have several diopter option eyewear available for each crew member
On-orbit headaches, congestion, confusion 
NSAIDs, judicious use of oral/topical decongestants; monitor environmental 
CO2 levels, maintain pressure below 3. 00 mm Hg
Post-flight orthostatic intolerance 
Reentry g suit; fluid load prior to pre-deorbit burn; post-landing IV fluids 
and antiemetics
Post-flight deconditioning 
Gradual reintroduction to balance, mobility, strength, and stamina conditioning program
IV: intravenous; NSAID: nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug
and increases alertness and performance. Specific 
wavelengths optimize light as a countermeasure. Blue 
wavelengths (440–550 nm) mimic the morning light 
spectrum, hasten schedule shifting, and increase alertness, whereas red wavelengths (620–730 nm) simulate 
dusk and enable pre-sleep. 
Pressure
EVAs during space missions require medical 
support (Figure 24-5). At altitudes above 15,240 m 
(50,000 ft), humans need either a pressure suit or 
enclosed pressurized cabin to prevent ebullism. 
For astronauts to operate in a space suit, the suit’s 
engineers must balance life support requirements 
with mobility. Ambient pressures greater than 6. 0 
psi create a stiff, almost inflexible spacesuit or EMU. 
Therefore, lower pressures are required to improve 
mobility and reduce crew fatigue. The US EMU 
is pressurized to 4. 3 psi. The hypobaric environment has the potential to create nitrogen bubbles 
in the blood and tissues, leading to decompression 
sickness. To reduce this risk, astronauts perform 
“pre-breathe” of 100% oxygen for 2 to 4 hours to 
eliminate nitrogen gas from their tissues. They also 
take aspirin before beginning pre-breathe to reduce 
platelet adhesion and subsequent blood clot formation. 13,14 The space MMO will also need to carefully 
monitor the spacecraft cabin’s repressurization rate 
after EVA to prevent ear and sinus barotrauma. A 
generally acceptable repressurization rate is between 
0. 5 and 0. 7 psi per minute.
Conditioning
During spaceflight, the main countermeasure for 
musculoskeletal and cardiovascular deconditioning is 
exercise. Astronauts on both short- and long-duration 
missions benefit from regular physical training. Fitness 
plans are created by NASA astronaut strength and conditioning rehabilitation specialists. These plans include 
the use of the CEVIS (cycle ergometer with vibration 
isolation system, Figure 24-6) and the T2 (Treadmill 2 
with vibration isolation system, Figure 24-7) for aerobic 
358
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 24-6. US Army astronaut Colonel (retired) Jeffrey N. 
Williams, Expedition 13 NASA space station science officer 
and flight engineer, exercises on the Cycle Ergometer with 
Vibration Isolation System (CEVIS) in the Destiny laboratory of the International Space Station. NASA photo ID: 
ISS013E17268.
Reproduced from: https://images.nasa.gov/detailsiss013e17268.html.
Figure 24-7. NASA astronaut Sunita Williams, Expedition 32 
flight engineer, equipped with a bungee harness, exercises on 
the Combined Operational Load Bearing External Resistance 
Treadmill (COLBERT) in the Tranquility node of the International Space Station, 2012. NASA photo ID: ISS032E011701.
Reproduced from: https://images.nasa.gov/detailsiss032e011700.html.
Figure 24-8. US astronaut Steve Swanson, commander 
of ISS Expedition 39, performs loading exercises on the 
Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) onboard 
the International Space Station 2014. NASA photo ID: 
ISS039E011261.
Reproduced from: https://images.nasa.gov/detailsiss039e011261.html.
endurance preservation, and the ARED for muscular 
strength (Figure 24-8). The ISS in-flight physical fitness plan consists of 2. 5 hours per day of aerobic and 
resistive exercise, 6 days per week, for US astronauts. 
This aggressive on-orbit conditioning program has 
been shown to preserve aerobic performance within 
the range of individual baseline V̇ o2max levels and 
maintain moderate strength and stamina in most crew 
members. Flexibility in the extensor muscle groups 
and proprioception are still challenges faced by crew 
in space because of engineering constraints in exercise 
devices and vehicle limitations. 
Medication
The MMO must ensure that crew ground-test all 
medications that could be used in space so that reactions and side effects are known. Of over 60 medications available for crew use in the on-orbit medical kit, 
the five most used are acetaminophen, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), nonbenzodiazepine 
359
Environmental Extremes: Space
hypnotics, antiemetics, and nasal decongestants. Of 
these, NSAIDs are the most commonly used. 13,14 Conditions such as headache, low-back pain, and minor 
muscle aches warrant the use of NSAIDs. Melatonin 
and the newer generation nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics, such as zolpidem or zaleplon, are used to treat 
insomnia during the initial days of flight and during 
sleep shifting. These drugs have shorter half-lives 
than the older generation benzodiazepine hypnotics 
such as diazepam, temazepam, or triazolam. There 
has also been concern that the older drugs could 
sedate crew to a degree that wakefulness and clear 
cognition would be impaired during an emergency. 
Many crew members have prescription medications 
for benign medical conditions that do not preclude 
flying in space, such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, 
hypothyroidism, or osteoarthritis, which require daily 
medication doses. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors, statin-class medication, thyroid replacement therapy, decongestants, and NSAIDs have been 
used for years in space and have been well tolerated. 
On-Orbit Conditions
Several on-orbit medical conditions have occurred 
during NASA missions, and space MMOs must be 
familiar with them. Astronauts in the µg environment 
experience medical conditions similar to terrestrial 
experience, such as skin rashes, nasal congestion, dry 
eyes, ocular foreign bodies, serous otitis media, and 
constipation. Conditions that are rather unique to 
spaceflight include space adaptation syndrome (which 
includes nausea and vomiting, mild anorexia, fatigue, 
and insomnia), SABP, and urinary retention. 21,23,39 
Space motion sickness affects approximately 79% of 
all crewmembers, with 10% of cases felt to be severe. 
Approximately 70% of men and 50% of women have 
described symptoms ranging from a loss of appetite to 
nausea and vomiting. The time course is variable: onset occurs immediately post-insertion to 24 hours later, 
peak symptoms occur at 24 to 48 hours, and symptoms resolve at 72 to 96 hours, on average. Etiology is 
unclear, but contributing factors are thought to be a 
combination of entering a new motion environment; a 
sensory mismatch in which the inner ear and nervous 
system provide signals that do not make sense in µg; 
and the approximately 2-L cephalad fluid shift that 
occurs in space. Flight surgeons have encouraged crew 
to maintain a 1g orientation despite the confusing 
visual cues created by the weightless environment. 
Medication has been moderately successful in reducing nausea and vomiting. The crew should be directed 
to use meclizine 25 mg orally or promethazine 25 
mg intramuscularly every 6 to 8 hours as needed. 
Inactivity or sleep, fluids, and gradual increase in 
activity over 24 to 48 hours restores crew members to 
preflight status in most cases, without recrudescence 
of symptoms. 16 
SABP peaks at 24 to 72 hour post-insertion and is 
treated with NSAIDs, short-acting muscle relaxers 
such as low-dose lorazepam, and assuming a fetal 
position to reduce pain. Urinary retention, although 
not unique to space flight, has been an issue due to 
medication side effects and mission activities that 
prevent bathroom breaks. Bladder distention and 
impaired detrusor muscle contraction has required inflight catheterization to relieve symptoms or retention. 
Therefore, the MMO must ensure all crew members 
are trained in self-urinary-catheterization techniques 
for both short- and long-duration missions.
Vehicle launch and landing operations are also part 
of the MMO’s responsibility as crew flight surgeon. 
Prior to launch, flight surgeons frequently premedicate 
non-pilot and commander astronauts with antiemetics 
to minimize the post-insertion nausea and vomiting 
associated with space adaptation syndrome. Crews are 
also advised to use enemas to minimize the need to 
defecate early on in the mission. Contingency launch 
operations during the space shuttle era included 
launch pad abort scenarios such as hypergolic fuel 
chemical leaks, fire, and explosion. Post-landing operations pose significant medical challenges to the flight 
surgeon due to the relative dehydration, muscle loss, 
and neurovestibular and cardiovascular deconditioning astronauts experience in space. Additionally, the 
potential operational implications of reduced muscle 
strength and endurance from µg exposure include 
decreased landing proficiency and impaired vehicle 
egress capability. The MMO will also need to consider 
the vehicle landing site characteristics (eg, water vs 
land), and prepare recovery operations accordingly. 
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
Ultimately, the MMO is responsible for supporting 
the medical mission for the commander and crew. 
Being aware of individual crew member needs and 
identifying realistic countermeasures to prevent adverse health effects are essential for success. It is also 
important to identify resources for learning about new 
strategies, especially during contingency operations. 
In this role, the mission commander can expect the 
MMO to support the following duties:
 
• Critical mission tasks
 
◦ Medical certification of astronauts for 
 
 
training and missions
 
◦ Medical care of astronauts and their 
360
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
families
 
◦ Support during medical consultations
 
◦ Military astronaut selection exams
 
• Operational mission tasks
 
◦ Medical support for space missions
 
◦ Oversight of crew and flight controller 
medical training
 
◦ Medical support to crew members prior to 
launch
 
◦ Monitoring EVAs
 
◦ Participation in contingency/rescue management during launch and landing.
 
◦ Being part of the flight control team in the 
mission command center
REFERENCES
 
1. Dorr RF. X-20 Dyna-Soar Spaceplane was decades ahead of its time. Defense Media Network. https://www.defensemedianetwork.com/stories/what-might-have-been-x-20-dyna-soar/. Published September 3, 2011. Accessed July 18, 
2018. 
 
2. Air Force to develop Manned Orbiting Laboratory [press release]. Washington, DC: Department of Defense; December 
10, 1963. http://www.nro.gov/foia/declass/mol/6.pdf. Accessed February 15, 2018. 
 
3. Easton RD, Frazier EF. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smartphones. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press; 
2013. 
 
4. Hale W. Wings in Orbit: Scientific and Engineering Legacies of the Space Shuttle, 1971–2010. Washington, DC: NASA; 2010. 
 
5. Lane H, Lulla K, Miller J. Select Astronaut Observations and Highlights of Space Shuttle Payloads and Experiments. Washington, DC: NASA; 2011. NASA/TM-2011-216150.
 
6. Cassutt M. Secret space shuttles. Air & Space Magazine. 2009(Aug). http://www.airspacemag.com/space/secret-spaceshuttles-35318554/. Accessed January 19, 2018.
 
7. Axe D. Semper fly: Marines in space. Popular Sci. 2006(Dec). https://www.popsci.com/military-aviation-space/
article/2006-12/semper-fly-marines-space. Accessed January 19, 2018.
 
8. Reed WD, Norris RW. Military use of the space shuttle. Akron Law Rev. 1980;13(4):665–688.
 
9. Oman CM, Balkwill MD. Horizontal angular VOR, nystagmus dumping, and sensation duration in Spacelab SLS-1 
crewmembers. J Vestib Res. 1993;3:315–330.
 10. Young LR, Oman CM, Merfeld D, et al. Spatial orientation and posture during and following weightlessness: human 
experiments on Spacelab Life Sciences 1. J Vest Res. 1993;3:231–239.
 11. Clement G, Moore ST, Rapha T, Cohen B. Perception of tilt (somatogravic illusion) in response to sustained linear 
acceleration during space flight. Exp Brain Res. 2001;138:410–418. 
 12. Scheuring RA, Davis JR, Polk JD, et al. The Apollo Medical Operations Project: recommendations to improve crew 
health and performance for future exploration missions and lunar surface operations. Acta Astronaut. 2008;63:980–987.
SUMMARY
This chapter on environmental extremes has introduced the MMO to the basics of optimizing human 
performance in space. Specifically, it discussed the 
historical relevance of the environment to success in 
military space operations, the basic applied physiology relevant to understanding the warfighter in the 
µg environment, and, finally, those evidence-based 
strategies demonstrated to preserve performance in 
LEO and partial-gravity planetary environments. The 
space MMO operates in a unique setting with limited 
resources, where urgency and proper planning can 
make the difference between success and failure on 
the battlefield. It is important to remember that the 
MMO is present not just to treat the wounded, but 
also to critically optimize performance and ultimately 
strengthen the commander’s hand for success. 
361
Environmental Extremes: Space
 13. Davis JR, Johnson R, Stepanek J, Fogarty JA, eds. Fundamentals of Aerospace Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2008.
 14. Barratt M. Principles of Clinical Medicine for Space Flight. New York, NY: Springer; 2008.
 15. Moore AD Jr, Downs ME, Lee SM, Feiveson AH, Knudsen P, Ploutz-Snyder L. Peak exercise oxygen uptake during 
and following long-duration spaceflight. J Appl Physiol. 2014;117(3):231–238.
 16. Meck JV, Reyes CJ, Perez SA, Goldberger AL, Ziegler MG. Marked exacerbation of orthostatic intolerance after long- 
vs. short-duration spaceflight in veteran astronauts. Psychosom Med. 2001;63:865–873. 
 17. Konieczynski DD, Truty MJ, Biewener AA. Evaluation of a bone’s in vivo 24-hour loading history for physical exercise 
compared with background loading. J Orthop Res. 1998;16:29–37.
 18. Leblanc AD, Schneider VS, Evans HJ, Engelbretson DA, Krebs JM. Bone mineral loss and recovery after 17 weeks of 
bed rest. J Bone Miner Res. 1990;5(8):843–850. 
 19. Carpenter RD, LeBlanc AD, Evans H, et al. Long-term changes in the density and structure of the human hip and 
spine after long-duration spaceflight. Acta Astronaut. 2010;76:71–81. 
 20. Zysset P, Qin L, Lang T, et al. Clinical use of quantitative computed tomography-based finite element analysis of the 
hip and spine in the management of osteoporosis in adults: the 2015 ISCD official positions, Part II. J Clin Densitom. 
2015;18:359–392. 
 21. Pietrzyk RA, Jones JA, Sams CF, Whitson PA. Renal stone formation among astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med. 
2007;78(4 suppl):A9–13.
 22. Baldwin KM, Herrick RE, McCue SA. Substrate oxidation capacity in rodent skeletal muscle: effects of exposure to 
zero gravity. J Appl Physiol. 1993;75(6):2466–2470.
 23. Kertsman EL, Scheuring RA, Barnes MG, Dekorse TB, Saile LG. Space adaptation back pain: a retrospective study. 
Aviat Space Environ Med. 2012;83(1):1–6.
 24. Ryder JW, Scheuring RA, Shackleford L. Musculoskeletal system: intervertebral discs disease. In: Biomedical Results of 
the Space Shuttle Program. Houston, TX: NASA, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center; 2013: 257–292.
 25. Scheuring RA, Moomaw RC, Johnston SL. Fatigue in US astronauts onboard the international space station: environmental factors, operational impacts and implementation of countermeasures. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2015;86(3):175. 
 26. Johnston SL, Campbell M, Scheuring RA, Feiveson A. Increased incidence of herniated nucleus pulposus among US 
astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2012;81(6):566–574.
 27. Scheuring RA, Mathers CH, Jones JA, Wear ML. Musculoskeletal injuries and minor trauma in space: Incidence and 
injury mechanisms in US astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2009;80:117–124. 
 28. Feiveson AH, Mendez CM, Somers JT. Assessing the Effect of Spaceflight on the Propensity for Astronauts to Develop Disk 
Herniation. Houston, TX: NASA; 2015.
 29. Bailey JF, Miller SL, Khieu K, et al. From the International Space Station to the clinic: how prolonged unloading may 
disrupt lumbar spine stability. Spine J. 2018;18:7–14. 
 30. Cogoli A. Space flight and the immune system. Vaccine. 1993;11(5):496–503.
 31. Sonnenfeld G. The immune system in space and microgravity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2002;34(12):2021–2027.
 32. Udden MM, Driscoll TB, Leach-Huntoon CS, Alfrey CP. Decreased production of red blood cells in man exposed to 
microgravity. J Lab Clin Med. 1995;125(4):442–449. 
362
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 33. Rice L, Alfrey CP. Modulation of red cell mass by neocytolysis in space and on Earth. Pflugers Arch. 2000;441(2-3 
Suppl):R91–R94. 
 34. Duffy JF, Czeisler CA. Effect of light on human circadian physiology. Sleep Med Clin. 2009;4(2):165–177.
 35. Dawson D, Reid K. Fatigue, alcohol and performance impairment. Nature. 1977;388:235. 
 36. Epelman S, Hamilton DR. Medical mitigation strategies for acute radiation exposure during spaceflight. Aviat Space 
Environ Med. 2006;77(2):130–139. 
 37. Scheuring RA, Conkin J, Jones JA, Gernhardt ML. Risk assessment of physiological effects of atmospheric composition 
and pressure in Constellation vehicles. Acta Astronaut. 2008;63:727–739.
 38. Murry M, Cox CB. Apollo. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster; 1989. 
 39. Thornton WE, Hedge V, Coleman E, Uri JJ, More TP. Changes in leg volume during microgravity simulation. Aviat 
Space Environ Med. 1992;63:789–794.
