21
Roles and Responsibilities of the Military Medical Officer
Chapter 2
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
JUSTIN WOODSON, MD, MPH*
INTRODUCTION
THE UNIQUE MILITARY ENVIRONMENT
In Garrison
In the Field
Deployment
Human Performance Optimization and Medical Research
BEING A MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
The “Vector” Model of the Military Medical Officer
The Legal Context of Accountability as a Military Medical Officer
Training and Professional Military Education
Leadership as a Medical Officer
MILITARY HEALTHCARE
FORCE HEALTH PROTECTION AND MEDICAL READINESS
THE SPECTRUM OF ASSIGNMENTS
SUMMARY 
*Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army; Associate Professor, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
22
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The new military medical officer (MMO) has joined 
a proud tradition of military medicine. That much becomes evident while reviewing the first chapter of this 
textbook, on the history of military medicine, which 
reaches back to long before the US military was even 
created. A new MMO follows in the footsteps of the 
likes of Ambroise Paré, Dominique Jean Larrey, John 
Pringle, Benjamin Rush, Robert Brocklesby, Jonathan 
Letterman, William Hammond, George Sternberg, 
and the countless modern military medical officers 
who have shaped this profession, saved thousands 
of lives, and improved the lives of thousands more. 
But unlike these historic figures who forged the way, 
current MMOs enter into a well-established system 
of military medicine in which many of the hardfought challenges have already been won. But what 
makes the military medical system different? What is 
unique about practicing medicine in the military as 
compared to the more common pathway of civilian 
medicine? The purpose of this chapter is to explore 
those questions, many of which will be amplified 
in later chapters in this textbook. This chapter will 
provide a framework for MMOs beginning to think 
about their new role as a uniformed medical officer 
in the US Army, Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard, or 
Public Health Service.
THE UNIQUE MILITARY ENVIRONMENT 
The discussion begins with a conversation about the 
unique aspects of the military environment. Typically, 
the public associates the military with combat. But the 
mission of the Department of Defense is much broader 
than just combat. A new MMO is likely to be placed 
in supporting units in a variety of environments, including in garrison, in the field, and deployed, each 
of which presents a unique set of challenges.
In Garrison
The garrison is where it begins and where the 
MMO will spend most of his or her time. This is the 
permanent positioning of military assets throughout 
the world. A quick Internet search will reveal the 
breadth of geographic assignments available. The US 
military is deployed on a standing basis throughout 
the world and has military bases not only in the continental United States (CONUS) but also in a large 
number of countries outside the continental United 
States (OCONUS). 
In garrison, permanent structures and buildings, 
well-established computer networks, and a generally 
resource-rich context form a familiar setting. Garrison hospitals, established in locations where service 
members are concentrated, generally function much 
as civilian hospitals do and are subject to many of 
the same constraints, including outside accreditation, 
interaction with the community, insurance billing, 
medical training programs, and the requisite administrative load. Yet even in garrison there are palpable 
differences from the civilian environment. While the 
patient population may look much like it does in a 
civilian hospital (including children, adult family 
members, aging retirees, and ill or injured active duty 
service members), the practice of medicine will often 
feel less restricted because access to care, financial considerations, and medical insurance are generally not 
issues. The healthcare team will be mixed, including 
active duty providers, government employees, and 
contractors, and each group presents unique leadership challenges.
For the MMO within this setting (as in all others), 
leadership is an inherent part of his core responsibilities. Although the medical team will not generally be 
dealing with the immediate threat of combat, the complexity of the garrison environment makes leadership 
demanding. As a leader, an MMO is likely to struggle 
with balancing multiple superimposed missions and 
external influences while maneuvering through large 
organizational staffs that often lack cohesion1 and 
may focus on varying aspects of the mission. Also, 
medical teams are often recovering from frequent and 
recent deployments with the inherent accompanying 
emotional burdens. As their leader, an MMO must 
be in tune with these challenges while attempting to 
balance the mission against team members’ personal 
lives outside the workplace. 
It is well established that in this context, boredom 
often leads to poor decision-making, which may result 
in unwanted injuries or fatalities, from causes including privately owned vehicle accidents, suicide, and 
recreational mishaps. 2–5 Addressing these hazards 
must be an ongoing focus for leaders. Additionally, 
the attention of effective leaders will center on the 
support and development of their team members as 
professionals through informal mentorship and formal 
programs, while also attending to their own personal 
growth and development. New MMOs must establish 
themselves as a physician and officer while becoming 
familiar with general life in the military. 
The new officer will find a robust support infrastructure in garrison, including physical fitness 
facilities, recreational facilities, financial counseling, 
23
Roles and Responsibilities of the Military Medical Officer
emotional and spiritual counseling, professional mentorship, and a thriving community of military peers 
and neighbors to lean on. An assignment in garrison 
will ultimately prove rewarding as an opportunity to 
develop a sense of belonging and pride in being part 
of a longstanding military tradition.
In the Field
Often, an MMO assigned to a fixed medical facility will also be attached to an operational unit as a 
secondary duty. The details of this responsibility 
vary throughout the different uniformed services and 
evolve over time. One constant, however, is that training remains a focus for operational units. Any time 
a military unit trains in the field, it is accompanied 
by a medical officer. The medical officer is usually 
integrated into the commander’s staff as a command 
surgeon, similar to arrangements in the deployed 
setting. (The details of this role will be discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 8, The Medical Officer on the 
Commander’s Staff.) 
Providing medical support in the field environment 
serves as a rehearsal for deployments. Undergoing 
training without the stress of the combat environment 
will better prepare MMOs for future operational assignments. The MMO must learn to work without the 
infrastructure typical of the garrison hospital, adjusting to providing care in a resource-constrained setting, 
a universal feature of military operations. Exploring 
these pitfalls in the field environment where there is 
an “escape valve” (typically available in the nearby 
garrison) will prepare MMOs for missions in which 
no safety net will be present. 
New MMOs are encouraged to seek opportunities 
to join the operational unit in training, which can 
provide some of the most rewarding experiences of a 
new military career. Such opportunities may include 
training outside the Army or Marine Corps garrison, 
flying on a cross-country mission with the Air Force, 
or going underway with a seaborne unit in the Navy 
or Coast Guard. Experiencing life at sea, in the field, 
or in the air is what truly makes a military medicine 
career unique. Short field exercises, cruises, or crosscountry flights will require very little preparation; 
however, longer exercises demand early involvement 
with the unit and planning. Gaining new skills and 
new relationships with other service members will 
also go a long way toward building credibility within 
those units, particularly when MMOs deploy with the 
same unit. There is also no better opportunity than 
participating in the field exercise or training mission to 
develop leadership skills as an officer and staff member, skills which the junior medical officer will do well 
to develop early; these skills will pay large dividends 
throughout a military medicine career.
Deployment
A “deployment” refers to any activity in which 
military personnel and materials are moved from their 
home station (garrison) to a specified destination, typically overseas (OCONUS), although domestic deployments are not uncommon, particularly in response to 
natural disaster relief efforts. Deployments come with 
a wide variety of missions, ranging from security operations in which the primary focus is diplomacy and 
conflict prevention, to large-scale combat operations, 
with many types of mission in between (Figure 2-1). 6 
Because the unit may have a mission that falls anywhere on this spectrum of conflict, and because the 
location of that deployment may be anywhere in the 
world (including CONUS), the nature of each experience will be unique. What is nearly universal, however, 
are long work hours often punctuated by long periods 
of boredom. Deployments are what military officers 
train for. It is the challenge of accomplishing the mission with usually limited resources in suboptimal conditions while testing leadership skills, medical skills, 
military skills, creative thinking, and problem-solving 
that make deployments rewarding beyond compare. 
Deployments are essential to developing a full spectrum of leadership and military medicine skills when 
and where they count the most.
Deployments consist of four phases, during which 
the medical officer will play very different roles. 
During the predeployment phase, the MMO plays 
a critical role in ensuring all members of the unit are 
prepared for extended deployment from a medical 
perspective. During this phase, in addition to evaluating and supporting unit members’ readiness for 
deployment, the MMO must ensure the medical team 
is trained and ready for the mission, as well as completing personal preparation. 
During the deployment phase, while actually on 
the mission, the MMO’s duties will span a spectrum of 
responsibilities no civilian medical provider would encounter. The scope of these responsibilities (discussed 
in more detail in later chapters) ranges from medical 
treatment to disease prevention to complex medical 
planning. During deployments, the medical officer is 
faced with challenges in the patient population (the 
unit) related to freedom of movement, fatigue, long 
working hours, threats from hostile action, endemic 
disease, stress-induced physiologic changes, and 
general physical and emotional demands related to 
the specific mission. The MMO’s importance to the 
commander cannot be understated, and the better 
24
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 2-1. The conflict continuum.
Reproduced from: US Department of Defense. Joint Operations. Washington, DC: DoD; 2017. Joint Publication 3-0: VI-2.
prepared they are, the better they will perform as the 
principal medical advisor to the unit.
During the postdeployment phase, the MMO will 
play a key role in assessing the impact of the deployment on unit members. And finally, during the reintegration phase, the MMO will be a key set of eyes 
and ears for commanders as they endeavor to ensure 
unit members successfully overcome postdeployment 
challenges and rejoin their families and communities. 7 
Human Performance Optimization and Medical 
Research
Whether in garrison, in the field, on a training 
mission, or deployed in a theater of operations, the 
demands on the military “patient” are generally amplified over that seen in the civilian occupational setting (although some civilian occupations or sports do 
present extreme exposures). Accordingly, one of the 
unique aspects of military medicine is gaining a thorough understanding of environmental and operational 
challenges and their countermeasures as summarized 
by the scientific discipline of human performance optimization (HPO). HPO refers to the process of enabling 
persons to perform with a high level of well-being and 
resilience and with minimal risk and stress, despite 
the challenges of the operational environment. This 
field includes physical fitness, dietary supplements 
and nutrition, mind and body management, family 
and relationships, and environmental conditions (eg, 
heat, cold, altitude, aerospace, water, and extended 
operations). 8 The MMO is expected to be well-versed 
in the science of HPO in order to provide counseling 
to individual service members and commanders and 
facilitate the successful mission completion, regardless of environment. Accordingly, an entire section of 
this textbook (chapters 19 through 31) is dedicated to 
this science. 
Because the military operates in the worldwide 
environment, it is also incumbent on the MMO community to continue engaging in medical research and 
development programs that focus on unique aspects 
of military medicine. This may include combat 
trauma management, HPO, human factors systems 
(eg, aviation, weapons systems, or combat vehicles), 
and a wide variety of other topics of unique interest to the military. Additionally, military medicine 
requires global biosurveillance programs that enable 
worldwide deployment with manageable risk for 
biological and disease threats, while also helping 
protect world populations against pandemic and 
epidemic disease. 9 
25
Roles and Responsibilities of the Military Medical Officer
BEING A MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
“If you are looking for perfect safety, you will do well to sit on a fence and watch the birds; but if you really wish to 
learn, you must mount a machine and become acquainted with its tricks by actual trial.”
—Wilbur Wright, from an address to the Western Society of Engineers
Chicago, IL, September 18, 190110
While it is possible for any medical provider to practice “medicine in the military,” it is the unique characteristic of the professional MMO to truly integrate 
all aspects of military medicine and officership into a 
dedicated practice of “military medicine.” Practicing 
military medicine requires that the individual develops skills in multiple dimensions. The MMO is a dual 
professional—both a physician and an officer—and 
must excel in each role to be successful. The nature 
of this duality will be further explored in Chapter 8.
The “Vector” Model of the Military Medical 
Officer
Through the years, attempts have been made to 
summarize the qualities of a good MMO, but most 
frequently these discussions devolve into a general 
statement of advice that “you just have to experience 
it to understand it.” While it is true that experience 
will elucidate the complexity of the unique role of the 
MMO, it is helpful to provide a simple visual model 
that embodies the full spectrum of characteristics of 
the ideal balanced MMO. 
The “vector” model of the MMO was first proposed 
at the Uniformed Services University in the early 1990s 
by then commandant of students, Colonel Barry Wolcott. An emergency medicine physician by training, 
Dr Wolcott understood the challenges of developing 
young medical officers and the value for those officers 
in providing visualization to help direct their growth. 
Modified slightly over time, the vector model simply 
places three primary domains of required skills for the 
ideal MMO onto the axes of a 3-dimensional graph 
(Figure 2-2). This graph illustrates the need for the 
individual to develop military skills, medical skills, 
and leadership. Effectively developing skills in these 
three arenas ultimately merges them into collective 
competencies in operational medicine, physicianship, 
and officership, which define the dual professional 
MMO. These terms, as applied in the model, are defined as follows:
 
• Officership is a set of skills that allows one to 
function effectively as an officer in the military. Underlying officership are principles, 
practices, and values that guide an officer’s 
Figure 2-2. The dual professional “vector” model.
Figure courtesy of: Colonel (Retired) Barry Wolcott, Commandant of Students, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, 1982–1993.
judgment, decisions, behavior, philosophy, 
and vision. Inherent in officership is effective 
leadership.
 
• Physicianship is a set of skills that allows one 
to function effectively as a physician with skill 
in the art of healing. A physician is educated, 
clinically experienced, and licensed to practice 
medicine.
 
• Operational medicine adds to standard clinical medicine all of the unique challenges of the 
practicing military provider in the operational 
environment, many of which may be nonmedical in nature. This includes a combination of both military and medical skills and 
implies direct and indirect leadership within 
the context of the military mission. 11
 
• Leadership is influencing people by providing purpose, direction, and motivation. It is 
the sum of the qualities of intellect, human understanding, and moral character to enhance 
the motivations, cognitions, and behaviors 
of individuals and groups for successful accomplishment of the assigned mission. 12
26
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
• Professionalism is the fundamental core of a 
medical officer’s values and behavior, including the critical attributes of personal courage, 
respect, openness, fairness, empathy, selfimprovement, social responsibility, integrity, 
honor, officership, non-judgment, altruism, 
and leadership. 12 
The Legal Context of Accountability as a Military 
Medical Officer
Beyond the challenges of duality and environmental 
and operational variables already discussed, there is 
also a collection of constraints and requirements that 
are unique to practicing medicine in the military. 
The most important of these is the legal context of 
general military service, which will be discussed in 
further detail in Chapter 5, Military Law and Ethics. 
However, it should be made clear that wearing the 
uniform inherently introduces accountability of the 
individual to the American public. The military officer 
is first and foremost a member of the military, meaning that he or she is subject to military law, which is 
founded in the Uniform Code of Military Justice, the 
Manual for Courts-Martial, and the military code of 
conduct. 13 The disciplinary measures applicable to 
other service members apply equally to the military 
physician, and because consequences of misconduct 
can be severe, disciplinary action for such conduct is 
also potentially severe. 
Military officers are additionally obligated by law to 
demonstrate exemplary personal and public conduct 
(Exhibit 2-1). 14 Unfortunately, more than one new 
medical officer has become entangled in the legal landscape with the threat of imprisonment or other adverse 
legal and administrative action based on a failure to 
EXHIBIT 2-1
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR MEMBERS OF THE UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES
I
I am an American, fighting in the forces which guard my country and our way of life. I am prepared to give my life 
in their defense.
II
I will never surrender of my own free will. If in command, I will never surrender the members of my command 
while they still have the means to resist.
III
If I am captured I will continue to resist by all means available. I will make every effort to escape and aid others to 
escape. I will accept neither parole nor special favors from the enemy.
IV
If I become a prisoner of war, I will keep faith with my fellow prisoners. I will give no information or take part in 
any action which might be harmful to my comrades. If I am senior, I will take command. If not, I will obey the 
lawful orders of those appointed over me and will back them up in every way.
V
When questioned, should I become a prisoner of war, I am required to give name, rank, service number and date of 
birth. I will evade answering further questions to the utmost of my ability. I will make no oral or written statements 
disloyal to my country and its allies or harmful to their cause.
VI
I will never forget that I am an American, fighting for freedom, responsible for my actions, and dedicated to the 
principles which made my country free. I will trust in my God and in the United States of America.
Reproduced from: 3 CFR, 1954-1958. Code of Conduct for members of the Armed Forces of the United States, 1955. Executive Order 10631. 
27
Roles and Responsibilities of the Military Medical Officer
understand their obligations under military law. Additionally, the system of military law has sometimes 
presented an ethical conflict in which the medical 
officer’s obligation to follow lawful orders from the 
commander and superiors may come into conflict with 
the Hippocratic principles of medical care. Learning to 
balance concerns such as patient confidentiality and 
sometimes competing obligations to the commander 
can be challenging, but understanding expectations 
of personal conduct in times of peace and war may 
prevent troubles down the road. 
Training and Professional Military Education
Upon entering military service, the new MMO is 
normally offered an opportunity to attend initial officer training (eg, the Army’s Basic Officer Leadership 
Course, the Navy’s Officer Indoctrination School, or 
the Air Force’s Commissioned Officer Training or 
equivalent). This training provides an orientation to 
military customs and courtesies, administrative and 
legal education, and basic military knowledge and 
skills. This minimal training is intended to start a career 
with minimal delay, but by no means is it adequate 
preparation for a full career in military medicine. To 
develop officership, the military services provide a 
series of professional military education (PME) courses 
strategically placed at different points in the career 
timeline. 
While the structure of this PME is different in each 
service, the intention is the same—to develop general 
knowledge and capabilities as an officer in the parent 
service as an individual matures in the ranks. The 
reality, however, is that medical education and the demands on an individual officer often interfere with or 
delay this training. In keeping with the earlier discussion about professional development along three axes, 
it is incumbent upon MMOs to advocate for themselves 
and seek out opportunities to attend this training at key 
points in their careers. Doing so will better prepare an 
MMO to integrate seamlessly into a multidisciplinary 
team when assigned to a military unit. 
Additionally, the military offers a wide variety of 
short courses that focus on specific military skills, 
which may be relevant depending upon specific career choices and assignments. While it may seem low 
priority to attend such training while being heavily 
engaged in early professional medical development 
(eg, residency, fellowship), failure to receive appropriate PME may delay promotion, and more importantly, 
result in suboptimal preparation for deployment and 
integration with operational units.
MMOs must recognize that they are members of 
both the profession of arms and of the profession of 
medicine. Programs such as those offered at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences or 
in general PME can help jump-start careers in military 
medicine with an understanding of basic principles, 
but they are only a starting point. Experience will 
serve an MMO well; however, true professionals will 
continue to develop themselves as both officers and 
physicians through continuing medical education and 
continuing military education. This further education 
may take the form of personal reading programs, 
military short courses, and of course formal medical 
education such as residency and fellowship. Just as 
someone cannot expect to be a whole doctor after completing medical school, he or she cannot expect to be a 
whole officer and leader after attending an introductory military course. Success demands a commitment 
to professional development as an officer.
Leadership as a Medical Officer
Leadership, one of the three pillars of military 
medical practice, is critical to an MMO’s success. 
At the Uniformed Services University, leadership is 
taught through the “PITO” (personal, interpersonal, 
team, organization) model of leadership, adapted 
from the US Air Force Academy and using the “four 
Cs” of leadership (Character, Competency, Context, 
and Communication). 15 Leadership is a multidimensional process, which is discussed in detail in 
Chapters 4 and 8. It should be noted that while direct 
leadership is often required, the MMO must (perhaps 
uniquely) often provide tangible leadership when 
not in a position of direct authority. This aspect of 
medical leadership presents a unique challenge to 
the medical officer, one that must be mastered in order to most effectively influence the mission and the 
command. The ability to gather support from below 
as well as from above, or “leading up,”16 is a critical 
component of the successful MMO. Leadership in the 
military is challenged by the diversity of personnel, 
the spectrum of missions, dynamic operations, and 
unique environments. A continual thread of personal 
leadership skills development accompanies the successful MMO’s career. In addition to formal programs 
of education in leadership, which will only scratch 
the surface, officers are encouraged to engage in a 
personal reading program to broaden their perspectives and abilities to influence others to accomplish 
the mission, regardless of the types of assignments 
they encounter.
The military is no better than its people, and the 
American public has charged the MMO with caring 
for them. Taking care of his or her soldiers, sailors, 
airmen, and or marines is paramount. As a leader in 
28
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
the military, the new MMO will also be responsible 
for a number of junior officers and noncommissioned 
officers. Accordingly, he or she will serve as both mentor and sometimes commander of these individuals. 
This requires effective mentorship. It requires extra 
time in a hectic military setting to submit awards 
recommendations when deserved, and to spend the 
extra effort learning how to write effective periodic 
evaluations, which enhance the promotion prospects 
of team members. These skills in and of themselves are 
not taught, but rather obtained through personal education and development, once more highlighting the 
need for self-directed education as a military officer. 
New MMOs should seek out those who understand 
the nuances of evaluation writing, such as the senior 
enlisted advisor for the command or fellow staff officers with more experience. One of the best ways to 
gain credibility with subordinates is by reaching out 
in mentorship to assist them in developing their own 
careers both in and after the military. 
Successful military leadership, particularly with 
increasing rank and position, relies heavily on effective communication. This comes in the form of 
one-on-one communications that serve to provide 
specific guidance to individuals, meeting management, written communications, and often large-scale 
public speaking. Speeches may range from a short set 
of well-chosen words at a promotion ceremony to a 
command-wide briefing given to address a problem 
or provide motivation. In the military, all staff officers 
are expected to frequently provide briefings to senior 
officers, commanders, and large assemblies—opportunities to build (or lose) credibility. Briefings often 
have a formal structure MMOs need to be familiar 
with. The ability to eloquently deliver a public address is a universal requirement for effective military 
officers. Young and experienced officers alike are 
encouraged to build these skills by actively seeking 
opportunities for public speaking and large group 
teaching. Speaking skills will enhance their ability 
to lead and will improve vital skills as an educator 
(inherent in medical leadership). Military communication skills are further discussed in Chapter 11, 
Military Communication. 
MILITARY HEALTHCARE
At first glance military medical care is very similar to 
civilian medical care. Residencies and military training 
hospitals are similar to those in large academic medical 
centers throughout the country. As discussed earlier, 
the patient populations can be quite similar to the civilian population, which includes the full spectrum of 
humanity from fetal care to caring for the aged and dying. Military training hospitals require the same spectrum of full-service clinical capabilities and research 
programs as are found outside the military. While it 
may be possible for some MMOs to serve their entire 
military careers in an academic military medical center, 
these centers are not where all, or even most, medical 
care happens in the military. For MMOs who choose 
(or are selected) to serve outside the academic medical 
center environment, medical care delivery may take 
on a very different feel. In the unit, in the field, or on 
deployment, delivering medical care is integrated with 
the diverse administrative and leadership tasks that 
have been discussed thus far in this chapter. 
MMOs will often be taking care of friends or colleagues who they have relationships with outside 
of the clinical setting. The unit’s medical officer is 
implicitly trusted, often to the exclusion of other 
medical providers, unless he or she loses credibility. 
Establishing and maintaining a trusting relationship 
with the patient population in this setting is paramount 
to success in delivering medical care. MMOs without 
credibility in the unit will find themselves bored and 
alone when their patients choose to go elsewhere or 
simply do not seek treatment. This dynamic highlights 
the importance of effective communications and 
leadership, as discussed earlier. To a large degree, 
while doctrine will provide a specific level of medical capability for the unit, the ability to provide care 
will be highly dependent upon the medical officer’s 
diligence in establishing programs and relationships 
within the unit, and with neighboring and higher level 
medical units.
When a member of the unit reaches out for help with 
a medical or mental health concern, there may not be 
the benefit of privacy or a robust medical capability as 
is customary in a medical facility. Learning to do more 
with less is the rule rather than the exception. However, the goal should be to provide the same standard 
of medical care in the resource-constrained, remote, or 
austere environment as would be expected in the academic medical center. Knowing who the more experienced senior physicians and consultants are and how 
to consult them at all times is paramount, even when a 
consultation may require a helicopter or telemedicine. 
MMOs will also need to interact with higher level 
medical authorities or the medical treatment facility in 
order to facilitate the unit’s medical mission. This may 
mean interacting with medical consultants on behalf 
of a specific patient for clinical concerns or working 
with other units for the sake of medical logistics or 
disease and nonbattle injury (DNBI) reporting. Once 
29
Roles and Responsibilities of the Military Medical Officer
again, understanding the MMO’s place in the system 
will be critical for success.
Integrating medical practice with the unit’s operational flow is not only critical, but can be very difficult, 
requiring extensive communication with commanders 
or key leadership personnel in the unit or across the 
military installation. Traditionally, “sick call” is held 
at times convenient to the command. Upon arrival at 
the unit, the MMO should learn about the systems of 
scheduling sick call that are currently in place or have 
worked (or failed) at that location. While it may be 
convenient to have all of the clinical workflow for the 
day show up at the same time, this methodology may 
not work well for the commanders or patients. On the 
other hand, in some settings distributed scheduling of 
medical appointments throughout the day may not be 
conducive to mission accomplishment. These considerations are not often encountered in civilian medicine 
and require the constant attention of the MMO.
Once evaluated, military patients are expected to 
return to duty as soon as possible. A critical role of the 
MMO is to evaluate the ability of service members to 
return safely to their regular duties. Given the nature 
of military operations discussed thus far, it should go 
without saying that this assessment must be made in 
the context of the occupational requirements for that 
individual’s duty. This highlights the importance of 
participating in the local training to the extent possible 
in order to gain a personal understanding of the operational context. Throughout history, successful military 
medicine practitioners have advocated for medical officers to train with their units for this purpose, whether 
flying with an aviation unit, diving with a diving unit, 
or practicing on the weapons range with a combat unit. 
Getting into this habit earlier rather than later will help 
not only to build a personal military skill set, but more 
importantly will enhance the ability to communicate 
and interact effectively with the commanders. Accordingly, when the time comes to advocate for a patient’s 
healthcare or duty restrictions, the MMO will be in a 
much better position to make appropriate decisions 
about patients while minimizing adverse effects on 
mission accomplishment.
In the military more than perhaps any other environment, medical care relies on established programs 
and systems to provide a full range of medical capability. In a theater of operations, systems of medical 
evacuation and a hierarchical system of medical capabilities are established based on doctrinal principles. 6,17 
Individuals are assigned throughout those systems to 
provide direct management and expertise for specific 
capabilities, which require specific training. The MMO 
may be expected to attend such training as well as to 
train others. Understanding who and what they are 
responsible for will help guide priorities, but MMOs 
should expect to be placed in positions with direct 
training responsibilities for hospital corpsmen, combat medics, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, 
nurses, or other medical personnel. The MMO may 
conduct formal training programs or simply provide 
continuing education for medical personnel. Commanders may have interest in developing common 
medical skills among their nonmedical personnel, 
in which case the MMO will be asked to supervise 
broader medical training programs such as the combat lifesaver program, which focuses on immediate 
combat casualty response for laypersons, or basic life 
support cardiopulmonary resuscitation programs. 
Whatever the case, conducting and supervising training will be a key component of any military medical 
practice.
The demands of military operations have resulted 
in remarkable achievements in military medicine 
throughout history. Recent conflicts have seen the introduction of new approaches and training programs 
that have resulted in improved survivability on the 
modern battlefield. 17 Specifically, the Tactical Combat 
Casualty Care system of emergency medical response, 
which emphasizes altered priorities of emergency 
medical delivery in the combat threat environment, 
now governs the approach to the combat casualty. This 
program is taught in a variety of venues targeting the 
full spectrum of military medical providers. Beyond 
the immediate life-saving response, casualties must 
be moved through an evacuation system that requires 
specific expertise in en route care and health service 
support planning. Later sections in this textbook will 
address the delivery of healthcare in the tactical environment and operational health service support, both 
pillars of military medical practice.
FORCE HEALTH PROTECTION AND MEDICAL READINESS
Arguably more important than responding to combat trauma or other health-related events is preventing 
them. Casualty prevention is a key component of what 
is referred to in the US military healthcare system as 
force health protection. Force health protection includes a broad spectrum of prevention and protection 
capabilities, including preventive medicine, health 
surveillance, combat and operational stress control, 
preventive dentistry, vision readiness, laboratory 
services, and veterinary services. 17 The key element 
of this system, which is somewhat unique to military 
medicine, is a focus on the population. In contrast, tra30
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
ditional medical education and practice places focus on 
the individual patient. For the MMO, the entire unit is 
the “patient.” As described in Figure 2-3, MMOs must 
attend to the individual patient while simultaneously 
caring for the population. This requires a focus on 
leadership, public health, preventive medicine principles, and systems-based practice. It typically means 
integrating with established force health protection 
systems at the macroscopic level while simultaneously 
creating effective force health protection systems at 
the local level.
An important aspect of force health protection is 
managing physical standards for military service. 
Through experience, the military learned it had to 
evaluate the medical fitness of its members to ensure 
they were free of medical conditions that could limit 
their performance in the military operational environment. Current physical standards for induction or 
continued service in the armed services are published 
by the Department of Defense18,19 and implemented 
according to service-specific regulations (eg, Army 
Regulation 40–501,20 Air Force Instruction 48-123,21 
and NAVMED P-11722). While new recruits are typically processed in military entrance processing stations 
across the country, applicants for entrance into officer 
commissioning programs or special duties often present directly to the MMO for evaluation. Furthermore, 
service members are subject to separate (and often 
higher level) physical standards when they apply for 
special duties (eg, aviation, Airborne, undersea, or 
special operations). The MMO must be familiar with 
published physical standards for general and special 
duty as applicable in their respective service. Specific 
administrative processing of such applications often 
permeates the military medical practice of the physician assigned to an operational unit.
The same physical standards apply when an individual service member becomes ill or injured. In 
these instances, temporary restrictions to duty may 
be necessary. Specific systems of communicating such 
restrictions to the service member’s leadership are in 
place to prevent misunderstanding. Such “limited 
duty (LIMDU) chits” or “profiles” reflect the published 
physical standards for each service and must be mastered by the MMO. In developing appropriate duty 
restrictions, the MMO effectively protects the service 
member from further injury while at the same time 
protecting the unit by eliminating unsafe or ineffective 
duty performance. 
Under certain circumstances, such as when a new 
diagnosis is made or a temporary condition lingers for 
an extended period of time, the service member may 
no longer be physically qualified for continued military service under the published physical standards. 
In these cases, a formal review process is invoked, 
during which the service member must undergo a 
medical and physical evaluation board process, and 
possibly service-specific formal boards, that evaluate 
the service member’s limitations against their ability 
to perform their assigned military occupational specialty. Understanding and working with this process 
is a necessary part of military medicine. Placing individual medical disposition decisions in the context of 
a thorough understanding of the military environment 
and the task that the individual service member has 
to perform further enhances the MMO’s value to the 
command team.
In addition to managing individual service members’ conditions and duty disposition, the MMO performs a preventive medicine function to identify and 
employ countermeasures (carefully coordinated with 
the command team, as discussed in Chapter 1, History 
of the Military Medical Officer) for the prevention 
and control of communicable diseases and endemic, 
occupational, or environmental threats. 17 History has 
shown that DNBIs have had a more significant impact 
on military outcome than combat injuries. Accordingly, a tremendous emphasis has been placed on 
preventing DNBI. Immunization programs, preventive 
dentistry, area assessment, and disease monitoring 
and reporting are important aspects of force health 
protection. At all levels of medicine in the military, 
someone is tracking and reporting disease incidence 
with the intent of identifying trends and epidemics and 
implementing preventive countermeasures. 
Figure 2-3. The spectrum of focus for military medicine.
31
Roles and Responsibilities of the Military Medical Officer
Additionally, preventive immunization programs 
are mandated throughout the military, and compliance with these requirements is routinely reported 
at the command level. At the local unit level, and 
occasionally when assigned in a specific staff role 
at a higher level, the MMO can expect to prepare 
periodic reports and briefings on DNBI rates and individual medical readiness for the unit. As Benjamin 
Rush recognized, command authority is necessary 
to effectively employ countermeasures to prevent 
disease. 23 But it is the MMO who must identify both 
the problem and the appropriate corrective action. 
These and many additional force health protection 
factors that make military medical practice unique 
will be further discussed in the second section of 
this textbook.
THE SPECTRUM OF ASSIGNMENTS
While it would be attractive to place a career map on 
the table to guide the way, it is simply unrealistic to articulate a specific pathway that each new MMO should 
take. Although attempts to define a career lifecycle 
for MMOs have been made, the reality is that such 
structure has never stood the test of time. There are 
simply too many variables and too many opportunities (in terms of types of assignments) to explore. New 
officers should talk to as many people as possible to 
explore what types of missions and assignments may 
be pursued. With some planning and effort, MMOs 
can craft their own military medical career.
In the Army, the first decision is whether to pursue 
an assignment in a tactical or a nontactical unit. Each 
has its own rewards and challenges. In a tactical unit, 
the MMO works closely with combatants, likely as a 
member of the command and staff team (discussed in 
detail in Chapter 8). In these units an MMO has the 
opportunity to function in a truly operational capacity 
as a member of a multidisciplinary team pursuing a 
military mission in the unique operational environment. On the other hand, an MMO may choose to focus 
on nontactical assignments such as academic medicine, 
or to engage in unique research or challenges in clinical 
medicine. The choice is personal, but the best advice 
has been described as sharing time between “white 
coat” assignments and “muddy boots” assignments. 
Doing so provides the broadest perspective on Army 
medicine and best preparation for promotion to the 
ranks of general officer. Whether or not this aspiration 
prevails, a diversity of assignments and experiences 
are waiting, and the full spectrum of opportunities 
should be explored. 
In the Navy, a critical decision is whether to pursue 
assignment in the seagoing Navy or in the Marine 
Corps. They are very different communities, and each 
has its own proud traditions. While it is possible to 
share time between them, most naval medical officers 
choose to focus on a progression of assignments in one 
or the other. If the interest is in tactical assignments, 
the Marine Corps has a wide variety of missions requiring support from highly motivated MMOs. On 
the other hand, shipboard medicine presents unique 
opportunities for international travel and expeditionary medicine. Aviation medicine, undersea medicine, 
and naval special operations are other unique opportunities. 
In the Air Force, the primary choice is whether to 
join a flying or a nonflying unit. In either case, the 
MMO should become a flight surgeon. The Air Force 
is all about aviation, and understanding aviation medicine is a key component of Air Force medicine. The 
Air Force is an expeditionary force and also presents 
its own opportunity for ground-based expeditionary medicine. If the MMO’s passion is to establish 
medicine in far-reaching places across the globe, this 
may be the right choice. On the other hand, there is 
possibly no more rewarding opportunity than to work 
with the high-performance combat equipment in the 
world’s largest and most advanced Air Force—equipment that challenges the limits of human performance. 
Mastering human performance optimization may be 
the MMO’s passion, and what better place to do it than 
the US Air Force?
In the Public Health Service, opportunities are 
available in a wide variety of assignments. The Indian 
Health Service will take the MMO to remote locations 
with resource constraints similar to those of the military deployed setting. There are also roles available 
supporting the US Coast Guard with opportunities in 
operational or aviation medicine. Or the choice may 
be to work in various agency jobs shaping national 
healthcare policy with an opportunity to impact the 
health of the entire nation.
SUMMARY
Regardless of the type of assignments encountered, 
a career in military medicine will be exciting and 
rewarding. Nowhere else will there be the opportunity to engage in such a diverse range of experiences. 
While frustrations abound in any type of work, the 
rewards of service in military medicine far outweigh 
32
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
any inconveniences an MMO may encounter. Opportunities to gain new skills through education 
programs in both military and medical disciplines, 
unique life experiences, and being a part of the distinguished heritage of the armed services all contribute 
to the allure of military medicine. Having said that, 
it should be emphasized that this career is only as 
good as the individual makes it. MMOs must be their 
own advocate; they should seek out opportunities 
to challenge themselves and to experience the full 
spectrum of military service. MMOs should actively 
endeavor to fulfill their goals, stay proactive, manage 
their personal administrative requirements, and seek 
out the best training opportunities and assignments. 
Speaking regularly with a senior military mentor and a 
career manager can help to shape the MMO’s military 
medicine as desired. 
The remainder of this textbook is designed to 
provide exposure to the unique aspects of military 
medicine introduced in this chapter. Reading and 
assimilating this knowledge will build a firm foundation for beginning a career as an MMO. However, 
it is incumbent upon the new MMO to commit to a 
career-long personal development program in leadership, military skills, and medical skills in order to truly 
become a dual professional MMO. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Roginkski J. Operational assessments in the garrison environment. Infantry Magazine. 2015;104(2):26–29.
 
2. US Army Combat Readiness Center. Army statistics and reports, weekly update. https://safety.army.mil/STATISTICS.
aspx. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 
3. Naval Safety Center. How goes it FY 2016. http://www.public.navy.mil/NAVSAFECEN/Documents/statistics/HowGoesIt.pdf. Published October 27, 2016. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 
4. US Department of the Navy. Occupational safety mishap summary FY 2007 to 2017. http://www.public.navy.mil/
NAVSAFECEN/Pages/statistics/index.aspx. Updated June 23, 2017. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 
5. Goldberg MS. Updated Death and Injury Rates of U.S. Military Personnel During the Conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office; 2014. Working Paper 2014-08. 
 
6. US Department of Defense. Joint Operations. Washington, DC: DoD; 2017. Joint Publication 3-0.
 
7. Marek LI, Hollingsworth WG, D’Aniello C, et al. Returning Home: What We Know About the Reintegration of Deployed 
Service Members Into Their Families and Communities. St Paul, MN: National Council on Family Relations; 2012.
 
8. Uniformed Services University Consortium for Health Military Performance. About HPRC. http://hprc-online.org/
about-us/about-hprc#about-us. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 
9. US Department of Defense. Special report: biosurveillance. https://www.defense.gov/News/Special-Reports/1012_biosurveillance/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 10. Smithsonian Institution, Board of Regents. Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1902:134. https://library.si.edu/digital-library/book/annualreportofbo1902smit. 
Accessed June 15, 2018. 
 11. Woodson J. USUHS leadership development program. Lecture presented at: Military Contingency Medicine and 
Operation Bushmaster; June 27, 2011; Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD.
 12. Woodson J. Becoming a battalion surgeon. Lecture presented at: Tzameret Program; April 29, 2015; Hebrew University, 
Jerusalem.
 13. 3 CFR, 1954-1958. Code of Conduct for members of the Armed Forces of the United States, 1955. Executive Order 
10631. 
 14. Requirement of exemplary conduct. 10 USC § 3583 (1997).
33
Roles and Responsibilities of the Military Medical Officer
 15. O’Connor F. Military medical practice and leadership program of instruction. Lecture presented at: Uniformed Services 
University faculty assembly; November 13, 2014; Bethesda, MD.
 16. Useem M. Leading Up: How to Lead Your Boss So You Both Win. 1st ed. New York, NY: Three Rivers Press; 2001.
 17. US Department of Defense. Health Service Support. Washington, DC: DoD; 2012. Joint Publication 4-02.
 18. US Department of Defense. Physical Standards for Appointment, Enlistment, or Induction. Washington, DC: DoD; 2000. 
DoD Directive 6130. 3.
 19. US Department of Defense. Physical Standards for Appointment, Enlistment, or Induction. Washington, DC: DoD; 2004. 
DoD Instruction 6130. 4.
 20. US Department of the Army. Medical Services. Standards of Medical Fitness. Washington, DC: HQDA; June 14, 2017. Army 
Regulation 40-501. https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN3801_AR40-501_Web_FINAL.pdf. 
Accessed June 15, 2018.
 21. US Department of the Air Force. Medical Examinations and Standards. Washington, DC: USAF; November 5, 2013. Air 
Force Instruction 48-123. http://static.e-publishing.af.mil/production/1/af_sg/publication/afi48-123/afi48-123.pdf. Accessed June 15, 2018.
 22. US Department of the Navy. Manual of the Medical Department (MANMED). Washington, DC: USN; June 1, 2018. 
NAVMED P–117. http://www.med.navy.mil/directives/Pages/NAVMEDP-MANMED.aspx. Accessed June 15, 2018.
 23. Rush B. Directions for Preserving the Health of Soldiers. Lancaster, PA: John Dunlap; 1778. 
34
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
