123
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Chapter 8
THE MEDICAL OFFICER ON THE 
COMMANDER’S STAFF
JUSTIN WOODSON, MD, MPH,* and SAMUAL SAUER, MD, MPH†
INTRODUCTION
THE STAFF OFFICER
THE COMMANDER
CHARACTERISTICS OF AN EFFECTIVE STAFF OFFICER
DUTIES OF THE COMMAND SURGEON
DUALITY OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER
THE COMMANDER’S EXPECTATIONS OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER
SUMMARY
ATTACHMENTS
*Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army; Associate Professor, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
†Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army
124
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The quintessential feature of competent military 
medical officers is successful integration of their medical leadership within the military line unit. This is crucial for all types of organization, whether it is the air 
squadron, ship’s company, or ground battalion. Early 
in the rise of the modern military, medicine struggled 
with its contextual role in operational units. Military 
surgeons paved the way in the Napoleonic Wars, and 
later the Continental military strived to establish the 
structure and function of the medical elements delivering care to the warfighter. 
A Civil War era ambrotype of Major Jonathan 
Letterman (Figure 8-1) demonstrated the successful integration of the command surgeon within his 
unit. As the Army of the Potomac’s lead surgeon, 
he stands with General McClellan as he addresses 
President Lincoln during a briefing on the battlefield 
at Antietam. Major Letterman’s efforts in overhauling the medical services in the Army of the Potomac 
at this key turning point in the war, stand out as 
a benchmark in the evolution of modern military 
medicine. It was Major Letterman’s service as an advisor, innovator, and medical planner that solidified 
the importance of the medical officer in successful 
military operations. Not only was this command–
staff relationship an intimate one, but it was one of 
practical importance. Major Letterman understood 
that in order to be successful in a staff function, he 
had to garner the support of his commander. With 
that support, he was able to write medical capability 
requirements into orders and keep the force ready 
and prepared to serve effectively in battle. He understood that integration of the medical plan with the 
battle plan from the very beginning was crucial for 
mission success. Major Letterman’s efforts marked 
the beginning of modern military medicine, in which 
a command surgeon is appointed at every level. 1,2 
Modern medical officers must understand the role 
of the command surgeon and its relevance to the 
unit’s mission. Incoming medical officers should 
embrace this role when arriving to a new unit to gain 
the respect and confidence of the commander and 
the members of the unit whose health is ultimately 
entrusted to their care.
THE STAFF OFFICER
The first task is to understand the structure and 
function of the command team. Junior medical officers will plug into the commander’s staff and be one 
of many staff officers. While focusing within a single 
lane of expertise, staff officers work together to enable 
the unit to complete the mission successfully. Military 
staffs are generally organized across predictable lines 
(Figure 8-2). There are many commonalities that are 
true across all units in the military, regardless of service 
or branch. However, the unit’s mission requirements 
or capability may require specific variations to meet 
these needs. 
Effective execution of the military unit commander’s mission requires complex and diligent coordination of direct line functions and support activities. 
While the commander directly controls maneuver 
elements to execute an assigned mission, he or she 
cannot function without combat support and combat 
service support functions. The commander is provided 
with a number of officers and noncommissioned officers (NCOs) to coordinate these functions and to 
prepare the unit for the mission. This personnel group 
is referred to as the “command staff.” While the commander is responsible for what the unit accomplishes 
and fails to accomplish, he is highly dependent on the 
staff to provide sound recommendations. Without a 
staff, the commander would quickly be overwhelmed 
and be rendered ineffective by the minute details in the 
execution of the mission. 3 The staff support the commander’s decision-making process by understanding 
his intent, understanding the operational environment, 
and using that information to formulate recommendations, implement the commander’s intent, and direct 
the unit under the commander’s supervision. Each staff 
officer and their team has the primary task of advising 
the commander in their own technical functional areas. 
Most commonly, staff officers will be delegated decision-making authority along their lines of expertise. 
This delegation of authority frees commanders from 
the burden of routine decisions while allowing them 
to maintain focus on critical tasks. The commander’s 
staff is divided into basic groups as follows:
 
• coordinating staff
 
• special staff
 
• personal staff
The Coordinating Staff
The coordinating staff is the commander’s principal 
group of advisors who advise, plan, and coordinate 
actions for the unit. Standard from unit to unit, across 
military services, and in the joint operational environment, they address common functions required by 
nearly all types of units. While they may have different 
names, the functions remain similar. This structure al125
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Figure 8-1. Jonathan Letterman with General McClellan and the president at Antietam. Photograph by Gardner A. 
Reproduced from Library of Congress Digital Collections. LC-DIG-cwpb-04352. https://www.loc.gov/item/2018666256/. 
Accessed November 21, 2018.
Figure 8-2. The general commander’s staff structure typically includes personal, coordinating, and special staff. This 
structure may be modified to fit specific missions or units.
lows a predictable division of labor in functional areas, 
which has been tested over time. The staff can then efficiently address the normal decision points and informational lines encountered during routine operations. 
This structure also supports the training of personnel 
to enable appropriate expertise and experience within 
specific functional areas. Table 8-1 shows the typical 
coordinating staff groups and their functions. They are 
part of the larger staff group, which includes personal 
and special staff groups (see Figure 8-2).
Functional areas and corresponding staff offices are 
relatively standard across units and military services, 
but can be tailored to the individual unit’s needs. 
Standard staff sections include Personnel (S-1), Intelligence (S-2), Operations (S-3), Logistics (S-4), Plans 
and Civil Affairs (S-5), and Communications (S-6). A 
principal officer is routinely assigned as the chief of 
each section, which consists of a robust team to aid in 
accomplishing assigned and identified tasks within 
that functional area. Sections do not work in isolation 
and in order for the unit to be successful, they must 
constantly communicate with each other both informally and in scheduled staff meetings. 
The Special Staff
While the coordinating staff group covers the necessary functions to address unit plans and operations, 
there are often required specialized technical functions 
that may be assigned to a unit. For example, there may 
be a need to address air operations and coordination 
with aviation authorities for the area of operations. 
In this case, a separate special staff section is established as the air liaison officer section. It functions as 
a separate staff group, normally headed by an aviator 
who understands the intricacies of air operations. The 
nature of the mission dictates the unique structure of 
each individual unit’s staff. There is no specific array 
of special staff officers that may be present in any 
given unit, however a surgeon and a medical section 
are almost universally authorized depending on the 
level of command. 3 Additional special staff groups may 
include safety, transportation, chemical, fire support, 
liaisons, and many others. 
126
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 8-1
STANDARD COORDINATING STAFF GROUP FUNCTIONS
Designation*
Title
Function
G1 (S1)
Personnel
Addresses all matters concerning human resources both military and civilian 
including manning, personnel services, personal support, and headquarters 
management.
G2 (S2)
Intelligence
Gathers and analyzes information on enemy, terrain, weather, and civilian 
considerations.
G3 (S3)
Operations
Coordinates movement and maneuver war fighting functions for the unit. 
Also oversees training, plans, and force development.
G4 (S4)
Logistics
Oversees sustainment plans and operations, supply, maintenance, transportation, services, and operational contracts.
G5 (S5)
Plans/future operations
Oversees operations beyond the scope of the current order. This section often 
works in conjunction with G3 (S3).
G6 (S6)
Signal/communications
Oversees all matters concerning radio and network operations, information 
services, and spectrum management within the unit’s area of operations.
*The commander’s staff is designated as “G staff” if commanded by a general or flag officer and as “S staff” if commanded by a lower ranking officer. Additional coordinating staff sections may be assigned based on the type of unit and level of command.
Source: US Department of the Army. Mission Command: Command and Control of Army Forces. Washington DC: DA; 2003. Field Manual 6-0.
The function of special staff officers is to coordinate 
and often assume direct responsibility for their specific 
technical functions. In most cases, special staff officers 
will be the only members of the unit with the requisite knowledge or skill set to direct operations in that 
specific functional area or to advise the commander 
on decisions within that arena. Special staff officers 
will normally be granted a wide berth of freedom to 
operate within their lane of expertise, as long as they 
maintain the trust of the unit and of the commander. 
Accordingly, the commander may frequently delegate 
limited decision-making authority to special staff officers within their own lane, assuming that they closely 
follow guidance from the command team. Special staff 
officers routinely coordinate with multiple coordinating staff officers and their functions typically cross lines 
among core functions such as operations, intelligence, 
and logistics. Special staff officers normally report to 
the commander indirectly through one of the coordinating staff officers or through the executive officer 
(XO) or deputy commander.
The Personal Staff
The third staff group bears special consideration. 
The personal staff have a unique relationship with 
the commander and work under his or her immediate control. While many personal staff officers have 
additional special staff functions, they are placed in 
a position of intimacy with the commander that is 
established and protected by law and regulation. This 
gives them a direct line to the commander and allows 
them to advise the commander directly on potentially 
sensitive issues without involving the remainder of 
the coordinating and special staff or subordinate 
commanders. This relationship provides a degree of 
confidentiality and a conduit for critical information 
that in many cases may affect the overall morale of the 
unit. In other cases, it offers a mechanism by which the 
commander can solve personal and private problems 
with individual members of the unit or interactions 
outside of the unit. 
The unit surgeon is an example of a personal staff 
officer who has both a special staff responsibility 
and also the privilege of a personal staff relationship 
with the commander. This relationship offers an 
opportunity to address health concerns within the 
unit without violating the confidentiality of patients. 
Other examples of personal staff include the senior 
enlisted advisor, the chaplain (responsible for the religious support within the unit), and the safety officer 
(oversees safety programs within the command). The 
commander places special trust in his personal staff 
officers as they are in unique positions to enhance 
his situational awareness about the well-being of his 
service members.
127
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
THE COMMANDER
To truly understand the role of the military staff 
officer, the reader must also understand the unique 
role of the commander. Legal and binding guidance 
provided by the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ) is unique to military service. 4 The commander’s authority is derived from the UCMJ. 5,6 The 
commander is charged with a tremendous amount 
of responsibility that accompanies this authority 
and is enforced by law. A military medical officer 
must understand the difference between command 
authority and general military authority to function 
effectively. 
Command Authority
Command authority derives ultimately from the 
Constitution, is codified in 10 USC §1644 and the 
UCMJ, and begins with the president as commander 
in chief (or National Command Authority). 6,7 Commanders are appointed to specific organizations 
that are designated as commands and are given 
command authority within that organization. Staff 
officers operate under the direction of the commander and on behalf of the commander. They 
serve as an extension of command authority, which 
is inherent in the decisions and work performed by 
the staff. Inherent command authority is present in 
all military leadership assignments by virtue of the 
leaders being placed in a position with subordinate 
units or service members. Command authority establishes the commander as the sole authority under 
the UCMJ for legal and disciplinary actions under 
military law. This is the basis for the importance 
of the commander’s guidance. Every action, every 
decision, and every plan made by a staff officer must 
take into account the commander’s guidance, as 
ultimately it is the commander who is responsible 
for those decisions or actions.
General Military Authority
General military authority also derives from the 
Constitution, 10 USC §1644 and the UCMJ, and begins 
with the president as commander in chief (or National 
Command Authority). 6,7 General military authority 
is authority extended to all service members to take 
action and act in the absence of a unit leader or other 
designated authority. It derives from oaths of office, 
federal law, rank structure, traditions, and regulations. 
This authority is delegated to officers and NCOs to 
preserve good order and discipline.
Command Responsibility
The commander cannot delegate responsibility 
that is inherent in his command, but rather remains 
responsible for everything that the staff does or fails 
to do. 3 Moreover, the commander is also responsible 
for everything that the unit does and everything the 
unit fails to do. 8 There are myriad statutory and regulatory requirements imposed upon the commander, 
who is legally (and morally) required to demonstrate 
integrity, disciplined performance, professional competence, and exemplary conduct. 9 The commander is 
responsible for training and equipping the unit and for 
ensuring its readiness for the mission. The commander 
is responsible for establishing an effective command 
climate and for attending to the professional development of the members of the command. The take-home 
message is simply to understand that while commanders do carry the absolute authority within the unit, 
there is seemingly no limit to their responsibilities. 
It should be clear that the military medical officer’s 
role is to make the best possible recommendations in 
support of the commander’s decisions and to provide 
the best possible support for the members of the unit 
within the medical functional area. Doing so requires 
a thorough understanding of the commander’s intent, 
consistent communication with the commander, and 
diligence to the medical officer’s responsibilities as a 
special and personal staff officer.
Technical Authority
While not often clearly delineated in Department 
of Defense documents and regulations, technical 
authority is a form of delegated command authority; 
dependent and intertwined with a command surgeon’s personal licensure. Medical officer technical 
authority is derived from the aggregation of federal 
and state law, rules, regulations, other jurisprudence, and policies contributing to the sub-allocation 
and subdivision of powers that delegate physicians 
the legitimacy to lawfully control and deliver healthcare within the Department of Defense. It recognizes 
the command surgeon’s special competencies of 
accumulated knowledge, skills, attributes, and formal education in medicine. Accordingly, technical 
authority provides the commander, through the 
command surgeon, the legal authority to clinically 
supervise subordinate physicians, advanced practice 
providers, and para-professional medical personnel. 
When assigned as a command surgeon, the medical 
128
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
officer becomes accountable for the technical control of all medical activities in the command and 
is responsible for coordinating healthcare efforts 
between the command and other medical organizations. These duties include the approval, training, 
and supervision of all patient care activities as well 
as establishment and enforcement of the standard 
of care within the unit, and the critical component 
of establishing and maintaining quality and safety 
assurance programs.
CHARACTERISTICS OF AN EFFECTIVE STAFF OFFICER
Experience as a staff officer and service in a military 
unit is a core competency for all military officers. Good 
staff officers have great influence on success of the 
mission, as commanders cannot effectively run their 
units without them. Serving on a command staff is both 
exhilarating and highly satisfying. Without minimizing the importance and impact of direct one-on-one 
patient care, there is a unique opportunity in the unit 
to influence the health of our warfighters on a larger 
scale through effective mission planning and program 
management within the unit. Effectively integrating 
with the staff is vitally important for success in executing the medical mission within the unit. 
Field Manual 6-0, Commander and Staff Organization and Operations, identifies several routinely recognized and common characteristics found in effective 
staff officers, such as the following10:
 
• competence
 
• initiative
 
• creativity
 
• flexibility
 
• confidence
 
• loyalty
 
• team player
 
• effective manager
 
• effective communicator
Striving to incorporate these into a personalized 
approach to the job will assist team integration and 
provide added value to the mission.
Good staff officers will also avoid certain attitudes 
and behaviors that can undermine their effectiveness or cause outright failure. According to US Army 
Captain Nate Stratton, there are several ways a staff 
officer can fail11:
 
• Forget that you’re still a leader.
 
• Treat subordinate units as the enemy.
 
• Treat higher headquarters as the enemy.
 
• Don’t take the time to get to know your organization.
 
• Undermine the Headquarters and Headquarters Company (HHC) chain of command.
 
• Hide behind your desk (where it’s not raining).
 
• Get fat.
Competence
First and foremost, staff officers must be competent 
within their area of expertise and also within the context of military operations. Skills related to service as a 
staff officer are particularly important. The command 
surgeon is assumed to be a good doctor, but must also 
provide value as a good staff officer.
New medical officers should understand that 
they are joining a team of professionals who may 
have upwards of 15 years’ experience as military 
leaders. Those professionals have trained and have 
often previously served as staff officers at a variety of 
command levels and in a variety of missions. Many 
have operated in complex, challenging, and demanding environments. They are well aware of military 
operations and are well versed on the methods of 
staff functions and unit operations. As a member of 
this team, the medical officer is expected to perform 
at the same level of competence and can rely on his 
or her fellow staff officers as effective mentors. This 
competence extends well beyond clinical medicine 
and direct patient care. 
Military medical officers must begin with an understanding of the operational environment, the unit 
mission, and the way it operates. Beyond understanding the latest diagnosis and treatment for a medical 
condition, they should also understand the relevant 
regulatory guidance for the disposition of a soldier 
with that condition. Medical officers must make 
informed and consistent recommendations to help 
commanders decide if a service member can deploy, 
train, or go to war. These recommendations will affect 
the careers of individuals and the unit’s readiness for 
combat. Medical officers must know the reporting 
requirements for a condition and its impact on the 
mission. Additionally, they would be expected to have 
appropriate medical supplies and pharmaceuticals on 
hand to manage the condition within the aid station if 
possible, to avoid unnecessary evacuations to higher 
roles of care. 
Applying medical skills and knowledge to the mission is an art form that requires development of individual staff officer skills. The ability to integrate military operational awareness with clinical knowledge 
is a hallmark of the competent medical staff officer.
129
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Help the Commander “See” the Battlefield
Recall that the primary role of the staff officer is to 
continually provide information to the commander in 
order to help him visualize his operational environment. The effective staff officer serves as a conduit of 
information, channeling observations from the subordinate commands and the environment outside the 
unit to the commander to influence the decisions of 
the command team appropriately. This requires that 
the staff officer is informed on policy and regulations 
within his area of expertise and remains up-to-date 
on the latest developments outside of the command, 
particularly at the next higher levels of command. This 
also implies that the staff officer has positioned himself 
to be able to “see” outside the command throughout 
the area of operations. Specifically, the command 
surgeon must be aware of medical threats in the area 
of operations.
Understanding the recognition, treatment, and 
prevention of diseases and environmental or occupational threats prevalent within the area of operations 
is critical. Translating that understanding into effective 
prevention strategies will help ensure that the unit 
remains combat effective. Maintaining awareness of 
the medical status of members of the unit is also part 
of ongoing analysis. The effective medical staff officer 
will have established a regular forum for communication to the commander and key staff members. It is the 
staff officer’s job to interpret development of medical 
events, to develop alternative courses of action, and 
ultimately to implement a plan to address these threats 
with the commander’s guidance in mind.
Initiative 
 
Historical analysis relates different opinions about 
the role of the staff officer, such as those found in the 
works of Jomini12 and Clausewitz. 13 Jomini served in 
the French Army under Napoleon and Clausewitz 
served in the Prussian Army under Frederick and their 
writing reveals an enlightening discussion on the role 
of the staff officer. Inherent in these writings is a difference of opinion about the degree of freedom and 
initiative that subordinate staff officers should have. 
The Prussian staff officer was often handicapped 
by a lack of authority to make independent decisions 
without the commander’s direct involvement. In 
contrast, modern US military doctrine has adopted a 
model more consistent with the Napoleonic (French) 
model, which allowed freedom for the staff officers to 
make independent decisions based on the guidance 
of a superior commander. The staff officer should 
anticipate the commander’s needs and do the analysis 
before being asked to do so. 3 Taking the initiative to 
recognize problems and develop courses of action is a 
highly valued characteristic of the staff officer today. 
Many analysts attribute the success of the US military 
largely to this characteristic, which derives from delegated authority. 
In military medicine, the awareness of the medical threats is often limited to the command surgeon 
who must take initiative to address these problems 
before they come to the attention of the command. The 
implication is that the effective command surgeon is 
forward leaning, constantly observing his or her unit, 
and anticipating opportunities to improve the medical 
readiness of his or her warfighters. More importantly, 
the command surgeon must be willing to make a 
decision that will favorably impact the health of the 
command without violating the commander’s intent.
Creativity and Creative Thinking
In addition to contributing to a common operational 
picture, it is the commander’s staff’s job to solve the 
problems encountered by the unit. The individual officer who enjoys the challenge of solving problems will 
be well suited for this job because military operations 
are prone to presenting unique problems. “As critical thinkers, staff officers discern truth in situations 
where direct observation is insufficient, impossible, 
or impractical.”3 Given the reality of military operations and resource limitations, the staff officer is often 
faced with the challenge of creating the “impossible 
solution” which can only come with creative, out-ofthe-box thinking. 
Medical planners should develop problem solving 
capability by playing games, participating in simulations, and attending courses and military training that 
take them out of their comfort zone and expose them to 
solving problems outside of medicine. It should also be 
noted that physicians have the potential to make particularly good staff officers because, inherent in their 
training is an ability to diagnose and solve problems. 
This includes formal education and demonstrable 
competency in the scientific method which relies on 
the systematic observation, measurement, formulation, and testing of solutions to solve problems. The 
difference is that while most medical problems are 
algorithmic in nature, most military problems are not. 
Accordingly, their solutions will require true creativity. 
Flexibility
There is no greater truth than the reality that military 
operations are defined by ambiguity. Constantly changing situations require staff officers to maintain consis130
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
tently adaptable minds. Plans serve as starting points; 
however, changes in the situation must be addressed. 
Unfortunately, it is quite common for the medical officer to develop a plan to address a particular problem 
within the unit and fail to recognize the need to change 
course midstream as the plan begins to fall apart. 
Effective medical staff officers will be required to 
manage a high degree of simultaneous workflows and 
must maintain the flexibility not only to change plans, 
but also to readjust priorities as the situation evolves. 
This does not mean that they should not commit to 
a plan, but rather that they must maintain enough 
situational awareness to recognize that assumptions 
regarding a specific plan may well have changed in 
such a way as to invalidate that plan altogether. 
Remaining married to a failing plan is a certain 
way to fail. Communicating those critical points when 
plans must change to the commander and other key 
staff is an important part of contributing to a flexible 
command staff. Plans must be nurtured to fruition with 
vigilance and purposeful engagement. 
Confidence
Staff officers must remain confident in their skills 
and contributions to the mission. The task is to continually develop creative plans. They must, however, 
remember that they do not operate in a vacuum. Other 
creative officers also develop creative plans. Frequently 
the medical officer’s ideas will not be incorporated 
into the final plan. The task within the planning cell 
is not to “win” by having a particular plan selected, 
but to participate in developing a comprehensive and 
functional plan. Even in those times when recommendations are declined or disregarded, staff officers must 
stay confident and continue recognizing problems 
and providing recommendations for their solutions. 
Confidence derives from competence which engenders 
credibility.
Effective staff officers know their lane, know their 
staff responsibilities, and maintain a committed effort 
towards the mission even when in the minority, or 
knowing that their recommendations are unlikely to be 
accepted. Doing the “right thing” requires confidence 
and discipline. 
Loyalty to the Team
One of the main challenges for new medical officers 
coming into a command staff for the first time is to 
understand the structure of the team and their role 
on the team. This isn’t quite as simple as it seems, 
and physicians must recognize that there is a distinct 
departure from their original environments. Within 
the medical treatment facility, the center of operations 
revolves around the patient. Physicians and their input into diagnosis and treatment decisions are center 
stage. Within the military unit, the center of operations revolves around the mission and focuses on the 
subordinate maneuver units (eg, the companies within 
a battalion). 
Medical staff officers serve in a support role whose 
primary job is to make life easier for the subordinate 
units and for the commander. Attachment 8-1 provides 
a real-world example that illustrates this important 
point. They are one of many staff officers who must 
all have a similar outlook on the job. Medical officers 
should endeavor to garner the trust of their fellow staff 
officers in order to enable effective collaboration. To this 
end, it is important to engage in training and planning 
meetings, routinely communicate with the other staff 
sections (which requires conscious effort), and socialize with them in order to get to know them and fully 
integrate into the team. Mastery in understanding the 
differences between operating in supported versus supporting assignment is key to operational integration.
Management
Staff officers are both leaders and managers. Leadership is defined as “influencing people by providing 
purpose, direction, and motivation. It is the sum of 
the qualities of intellect, human understanding, moral 
character to enhance the motivations, cognitions, and 
behaviors of individuals and groups to accomplish the 
assigned mission.”14,15
In contrast, management consists of “controlling 
a group or a set of entities to accomplish a goal.”16 
Inherent to staff work is the management of specific 
programs and initiatives within the mission. Staff officers must effectively monitor and control the programs 
in their functional areas. Administrative overhead is 
inherent in the management of a battalion, squadron, 
or other military unit and the management responsibility falls directly on the shoulders of the staff officers 
within that unit.
Despite the need to manage within the unit, staff 
officers cannot forget that they are leaders above all 
else. The staff’s primary function is to provide direction to unit members, incorporating the commander’s 
guidance. While the staff may assist, it is ultimately the 
commander’s responsibility to inspire and motivate. 
The commander cannot do so effectively without an 
effective staff.
Speak the Language of the Staff Officer
To be effective, the staff officer must be an effective 
communicator. 3 Central to the work of the staff officer is intensive written and verbal communication. 
131
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Staff officers are expected to routinely brief not only 
the commander and other senior leaders, but also the 
unit, individual teams, and individual members of the 
unit. Common types of briefings include the following: 
 
• information briefings (to provide technical 
knowledge), 
 
• decision briefings (to provide information that 
facilitates an answer or decision), and 
 
• mission briefings (to provide detailed instructions and information regarding the conduct 
and execution of a mission). 
Medical officers should adopt the common language 
of the staff officer in order to establish credibility and 
ensure that communications are effective. Just as effective doctor-patient communication is key to building a therapeutic bond, a medical officer’s ability to 
communicate effectively is key to success within the 
command. It is the communicator’s responsibility to 
adapt their style to ensure that the LISTENER heard 
and understood the message as it was intended. Every 
audience is different, and in military units listeners 
may range from junior enlisted members to senior 
officers. One thing they all have in common is a standard military vernacular, one which physicians are 
often not accustomed to hearing. The new command 
surgeon has a very powerful opportunity during his 
or her first briefing to either gain or forfeit credibility 
based on the language, style, and format of the briefing. Therefore, understanding the culture of the unit is 
vitally important, and using the appropriate language 
can make the difference between understanding and 
confusion. 
Another aspect of the communication challenge is 
to understand that staff officers in a military unit are 
accustomed to using specific tools during their planning process. Knowing and using them can greatly 
facilitate transfer of information. Specifically, briefing 
formats (Attachments 8-2 and 8-3) report structure, the 
military decision-making process, military and technical terminology, and other accepted processes could 
greatly streamline your collaborative efforts for the 
accomplishment of the mission. Often specific formats 
are prescribed for various reports and orders and can 
be found in instructions, regulations, field manuals, 
and joint publications. You should begin by simply 
asking the question of your predecessors, mentors, 
NCOs, or fellow staff officers for the normally accepted 
formats, procedures, or tools for a given task. Fortunately, with Internet access, it is easy to find answers 
and get links to the appropriate publications.
Learning to use these tools effectively takes time 
and focused effort, and is part of an individual’s 
professional development as a military medical officer. The Uniformed Services University military 
medical practice curriculum, professional military 
education courses, and additional short military 
courses in planning and staff work are available to 
those who take the initiative to enhance their capacity 
as a staff officer. The command surgeons’ capability 
to ensure quality care is completely dependent on 
their ability to communicate to the command and 
the commander.
DUTIES OF THE COMMAND SURGEON
A command surgeon is designated at all levels of 
command. Typically, that includes commands that 
begin at the battalion or squadron level, and are normally commanded by an Army or Air Force Lieutenant Colonel or Navy Commander (O-5 grade) serving 
hundreds of service members, and extends upwards to 
those commanded by general or flag officers serving 
thousands. The junior medical officer coming directly 
out of graduate medical education may be assigned as 
a battalion surgeon or squadron surgeon, or possibly 
as a deputy surgeon in a larger higher level command. 
This assignment will likely be exciting, but also intimidating as the new medical officer begins to grasp the 
breadth of the job. Many are surprised by the number 
of broad-based responsibilities accompanying the 
position of command surgeon. Becoming proficient 
across the full spectrum of responsibilities of the command surgeon position is paramount to success.
The command surgeon will often directly lead a 
team of medical personnel, which will range from 
one or two NCOs or medics/corpsman and possibly a 
physician assistant to a much larger medical platoon 
that may include 30 to 40 personnel or more. Resources 
may include combat medics/corpsmen, preventive 
medicine NCOs or officers, medical service corps officers, nurses, medical practitioners, psychologists, 
radiology technicians, or other specialty technicians 
or providers depending upon the type of command. 
One of the first tasks upon arriving to the unit is determining available personnel and equipment as well 
as a general medical capability, which varies among 
commands and locations. Establishing daily proprietorship of the medical officer’s direct report medical 
personnel and equipment is paramount to mission 
accomplishment. 
New command surgeons should reach out to the 
command before reporting in to the unit. He or she 
should contact the commander and senior staff (eg, 
the executive officer, to whom the command surgeon 
will likely report), as well as the current or outgoing 
132
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
command surgeon and medical section senior NCO. 
This begins the process of integrating into a unit and 
learning about the mission and resources. This conversation will also help to identify key issues ahead 
of time and what knowledge or skills might be useful 
to gain before going into the position. Making a good 
first impression with the command team including 
the senior enlisted advisor can go a long way towards 
paving the path for success.
The command surgeon is responsible for supervising and managing a wide array of functions and 
services within the command, including the following: 
 
• Advise the commander on the health of the 
command.
 
• Advise the commander on all aspects of medical interest in the area of operations (AO).
 
• Oversee preventive medicine plans, programs, and recommendations to the commander. 
 
• Develop the Health Service Support (HSS) 
portion of operation plans (OPLANs) and 
operation orders (OPORDs).
 
• Deliver healthcare (treatment).
 
• Synchronize HSS efforts with next higher 
medical authority.
 
• Task organize HSS personnel and units.
 
• Evaluate medical epidemiological data and 
develop recommendations for the commander.
 
• Provide medical intelligence.
 
• Oversee medical evacuation with air or 
ground resources in coordination with aeromedical evacuation (AE) or medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) personnel.
 
• Develop local medical policies as needed.
 
• Interpret and implement medical policies 
from higher organizations.
 
• Supervise, plan, and execute within all medical functional areas.
These medical functions generally apply to individual service and joint organizations, but are best 
described in Army doctrine as Health Service Support 
planning considerations,1 which provides the basis 
for the command surgeon’s job description. While the 
level of involvement in each functional area will vary 
based on the level of command, it is incumbent on the 
command surgeon to attend to these functional areas, 
in many cases providing direct services and in other 
cases simply integrating these considerations into the 
planning process for the command. The unit’s mission will determine the requirements for the specific 
situation.
Clinical Capabilities and Medical Logistics 
Support in the Unit
The medical officer is responsible for providing 
basic medical care for the members of the unit. Patient survival may often depend on availability of the 
required supplies and equipment being co-located 
with the patient at the time of need. It should be obvious that medical providers cannot function clinically 
without equipment and medical supplies. This is described in the context of the health support planning 
considerations as “clinical capabilities” and requires 
a medical logistics (MEDLOG) support program. A 
unique task within the unit is to ensure that there is 
a steady resupply of medical supplies (class VIII) to 
sustain the basic medical mission. There is typically 
no dedicated logistics team taking care of this process 
in small organizations. Often in the medical treatment 
facility, medical officers become dependent on what 
appears to be an invisible process working behind the 
scene to keep the supply cabinets in the emergency 
rooms, clinics, wards, or operating suites stocked 
with the supplies and pharmaceuticals required in 
the daily delivery of medical care. In the operational 
environment, these supplies simply will not be available without the daily, routine attention of the medical 
section to the MEDLOG function. 
Preventive Medicine and Health Surveillance
Through the landmark work of pioneering early 
American patriot physicians John Morgan and Benjamin Rush,17 and 18th century British physicians 
Richard Brocklesby18 and Sir John Pringle19 and later 
reinforced by Dr Jonathan Letterman2 in the American 
Civil War and others, we understand that a critical 
component of successful military operations is maintaining the health of the force and control of disease 
within the military camp. Accordingly, a significant 
effort of the command surgeon is dedicated to preventive medicine and health surveillance. 
Regulations require the commander of the unit to 
ensure that his service members maintain medical 
readiness in the form of periodic health assessments, 
medical examinations, occupational surveillance, and 
immunization programs. Responsibility for these requirements naturally falls to the command surgeon. 
Attention to these programs can occupy a tremendous 
amount of the command surgeon’s time, who should 
expect to be asked to brief the commander on a regular 
and on-demand basis regarding the medical readiness 
status of the members of his unit. Failure to meet medical readiness standards could render the unit unqualified for deployment. Therefore, the commander will 
133
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
place command emphasis on ensuring that all medical 
requirements such as immunizations remain current. 
And, while delivering the full spectrum of quality healthcare is paramount, particular attention and 
diligent effort must be made to minimize or eliminate 
medical, organizational, non-value-added barriers to 
issues tracked by higher headquarters. Tracked issues 
signal senior command emphasis, which is a surrogate 
marker of system or organizational importance and 
value, such as medical readiness. 
The command surgeon should utilize the commander’s legal command authority by working 
carefully with the coordinating staff to incorporate 
immunizations and other medical readiness programs 
into the unit’s training schedule on a regular basis to 
ensure that members of the unit are up-to-date. The 
command surgeon’s duty is to provide broad, open, 
available, and flexible technical means to accomplish 
medical readiness while the unit’s subordinate commanders are responsible for accepting this support. In 
doing so, it inherently implies that the surgeon’s office 
is adequately tracking readiness status. Fortunately, 
well-established service-wide tools are available to 
unit surgeons to facilitate tracking of medical readiness items.
Clearly, medical readiness tracking is a critical task 
for the medical officer (see Chapter 30). Command 
surgeons should be familiar with and ensure that they 
and their team have access to these systems including 
the Medical Readiness Reporting System (MRRS) for the 
Navy and Marine Corps, the Medical Protection System 
(MEDPROS) for the Army, and Aeromedical Services 
Information Management System (ASIMS) for the Air 
Force. Additional information is available on the Military 
Health System website at https://health.mil/MilitaryHealth-Topics/Health-Readiness/ImmunizationHealthcare/Immunization-Tracking-Systems.
Prior to deployments and periodically, the medical 
officer will be expected to conduct systematic reviews 
of medical readiness status for the members of the unit. 
One key nuance for the reader is the term systematic. 
Often referred to as SRP (soldier readiness program) 
or PDR (pre-deployment readiness) exercises, these 
events provide an opportunity to close gaps in readiness but require planning and coordination with the 
command and staff in order to execute effectively. 
Members of the unit will be required to attend while 
medical team personnel review medical records and 
provide immunizations, hearing exams, eye exams, 
dental exams, and other medical readiness items as 
needed. While the medical elements of these programs 
are dominant, coordination with the S1 (personnel) 
shop will often include additional legal, financial, and 
administrative readiness requirements in the process 
as well. Projecting the timing of the SRP and coordinating with the S3 (operations) to place these events 
on the training schedule will help to ensure their success and will ultimately save the command surgeon a 
tremendous amount of frustration.
Prevention of Stress Casualties
Doctrine and current situation concerns require 
mental health services to be provided within the 
unit. New medical officers are often surprised by the 
amount of attention required to care for unit members 
and manage the program. In the operational environment, a combination of factors amplify the already 
inherent behavioral health challenges that service 
members carry with them. Some of these factors include the following: 
 
• separation from home and family, 
 
• the stress of the operational combat environment, 
 
• long hours, and 
 
• close living quarters and working environment. 
The command surgeon is in a unique position, along 
with the chaplain, to be available to address individual 
and collective mental health problems within the unit. 
Command surgeons are expected to have extensive 
knowledge of behavioral health issues and act as the 
conduit between command and external behavioral 
health activities. Accordingly, wise medical officers 
will seek to expand their behavioral health competencies as commanders will often turn to them to identify 
morale issues, which may originate from individual 
mental health conditions. Additionally, in the routine 
course of healthcare delivery within the units, members 
may confide in their surgeon regarding the emotional 
challenges they are facing during the course of a deployment or long stint of training. Attentive medical 
officers who recognize, diagnose, and treat mental 
health disorders may be able to make the greatest impacts on individual soldiers by working closely with 
the command and the chaplain in order to best support 
affected individuals during difficult times. 
Unfortunately, it is rare that medical training programs in residencies or medical schools adequately 
prepare their graduates for psychiatric care. For this 
reason, the curricula in programs that routinely prepare medical officers for operational assignments (eg, 
the flight surgeon training programs in the Army, 
Navy, and Air Force) include significant time addressing psychiatric disposition and management. It can be 
very helpful if the medical officer thoroughly under134
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
stands the dynamics of interpersonal interactions that 
are likely to result from various personality disorders 
or psychiatric conditions and can recognize these if 
they surface within the social dynamics of the unit. 
When these situations arise, they can often be 
disproportionately distracting from the mission and 
medical officers may be the only member of the unit 
with the background and training to understand the 
factors contributing to these interpersonal issues. In the 
role as a personal staff officer, medical officers must be 
able to appropriately advise the commander in ways 
that can minimize the distractions and de-escalate 
situations before they become out of control.
Medical officers can also anticipate the need to 
manage routine combat stress reactions to operations 
in the military environment and should be prepared 
to provide immediate treatment and referral. At a 
very minimum it will be incumbent upon the command surgeon to establish a coordinating relationship with combat stress control resources within the 
area of operations in order to ensure that appropriate 
services are available for members of the unit when 
needed. 
Medical Planning
Another important role that command surgeons 
play is as principal medical planner for the commander. While in some units command surgeons may 
have the luxury of an assigned medical planner, this 
is not a universally available asset. 
The specific health support planning responsibilities of the command surgeon are numerous. Figure 
8-3 shows functional areas that must be considered 
during medical planning for operations. In the planner 
role, medical officers will be expected to incorporate 
functions such as medical intelligence and threat 
analysis, patient movement, mass casualty planning, 
and host nation support into operational planning. 
Other planning and coordination may be required as 
well, depending on the mission. Integrating these considerations into the operational plan from the earliest 
phase is critical to mission success as has been observed 
throughout history in military operations. 
The Army Medical Department (AMEDD) in the 
Continental Army during the American War for 
Independence was born out of the recognition that 
military mission success was in large part dependent 
upon medical support. The fighting force needed to 
understand that if they were injured, systems would 
be in place to provide for their effective evacuation, 
Figure 8-3. There are many functional areas comprising 
health support that must be considered when planning a mission. Although not all functions are relevant for all missions 
or at all levels of command, using this or a similar graphic 
or checklist can help ensure nothing is missed.
Figure 8-4. The joint operational planning process is used 
in its entirety during deliberate planning, but may be modified by the commander for crisis action (time constrained) 
planning. Staff sections work through this process using 
commander’s guidance and available information products. 
The ultimate goal is to produce an effective military plan or 
order to accomplish the command’s mission. 
Reproduced from: US Department of Defense. Joint Planning. Washington, DC: DOD; 2017. Joint Publication 5-0, 
Figure V-1.
135
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
treatment, and rehabilitation. A key contribution 
of Dr Jonathan Letterman to military medicine was 
his understanding that medical planning had to be 
incorporated into the commander’s military orders 
to ensure medical care was provided through every 
phase of the operation on the battlefield. 
In the modern military, every operation requires 
a written or verbal order describing the details for 
the execution of that mission. The command surgeon 
is responsible for writing the medical annex to that 
order, incorporating all of the relevant medical planning considerations. Medical planning and orders 
production is an art form and skill which takes time to 
acquire and is not adequately taught in most training 
programs. During officer indoctrination programs, 
pre-commissioning programs, military coursework, 
and at the Uniformed Services University, officers 
have the opportunity to learn details about the medical planning process and orders production, often 
practicing medical planning in simulated exercises. 
However, it is not until medical officers are assigned 
to the operational unit and integrated into the medical 
planning process that they discover the complexity and 
criticality of military planning. 
The Joint Planning Process and Military DecisionMaking Process (Figure 8-4) are described in publications such as Joint Publication 5-0, Joint Operation 
Planning and Field Manual 6-0, Commander and Staff 
Organization and Operations. These references are 
valuable resources to have on hand when beginning 
to integrate into the unit’s planning process. 
Communicating Risk to the Commander
By this point, many of the intricacies of the surgeon’s role as an advisor to the commander should be 
clear (see Figure 22-5). Recall that the commander is responsible for all critical decisions in the unit. However, 
the commander is only as good as the information he 
or she is provided. Rarely, if ever, is a decision absolute 
or a problem unambiguous. Frequently, command 
decisions are complicated by the variety of adverse 
outcomes possible based on the nature of the operation and specific branching pathways followed in the 
decision tree. This is called risk and is defined as the 
product of the probability of a bad outcome occurring 
and the severity of the expected consequence. 20 
Risk = Probability × Severity
The commander is responsible for making the 
difficult decisions inherent in planning for military 
operations. This responsibility cannot be delegated. 
However, it is the responsibility of the commander’s 
staff to identify risk and to communicate it effectively 
to the commander to enable him to make the best possible decision. Risk management is an art form and a 
key component of basic staff work. The medical officer 
should recognize that the vast majority of communications to the commander are based on identifying risk 
associated with a given situation, quantifying that risk, 
and presenting potential courses of action to mitigate 
that risk (ie, risk controls). The commander should 
never assume risk that may potentially imperil the 
unit, its members, or its mission without being properly advised by his staff. 
Thinking about regular communications with the 
commander through a risk management framework 
can help to clarify the correct approach to many problems. Most problems in the conduct of the medical 
mission within the unit can be thought of as hazards 
managed by risk controls that are supervised by the 
commanders, their leaders, or medical personnel. By 
communicating effectively to the commander, the 
medical officer shares the burden of difficult decisions 
not only with commander but also with the entire 
staff. Collectively this type of collaboration serves to 
improve the safety and efficiency of all operations 
within the unit.
DUALITY OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER
After discussing the role and responsibilities of the 
staff officer, and more specifically of the medical staff 
officer or command surgeon, it should be evident that 
there is a unique challenge faced by the medical officer 
in the unit—that of duality—which can be represented 
on several different levels.
The Challenge of Maintaining Two Professions
The medical officer must maintain proficiency both 
as a medical provider and as an officer and leader. This 
requires continuing education in professional military 
skills and leadership as well as in medicine. Physicians 
new to the military know the challenges of keeping 
up with the medical literature, but now must add the 
challenge of keeping up with current developments 
in the political and military arena. Balancing these 
requirements can be difficult. It is expected within 
the unit that medical officers will be good physicians 
and also good staff officers. Often the former comes 
relatively easily, while the latter requires a fair amount 
of effort for new medical officers. 
New military medical officers often have an inherent belief that the primary function is to provide 
136
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
clinical medical care, which is normal for work in a 
medical treatment facility. A critical lesson is that in 
a military unit, only a small fraction of time will be 
dedicated to clinical medicine, with the remainder 
of time dedicated to administrative, support, and 
advisory tasks. New officers must demonstrate constant vigilance toward external agencies attempting 
to control their time. Command surgeons should not 
be utilized in other medical activities when full-time 
application to the unit is necessary to ensure mission 
accomplishment. These external organizations may 
benefit from a professionally and cautiously delivered 
reminder that command surgeons must support their 
own commander first.
Conflicts Between Loyalty to the Patient and to the 
Commander
The command surgeon may find himself in a position of conflict between his loyalty to the commander 
and his inherent loyalty to his patients. Chaplains 
may also face this dilemma in their normal daily activities. In both the medical and spiritual or mental 
health encounter with an individual member of the 
unit, a protected relationship is established that is 
recognized by common and specific law. Physicians 
enjoy this confidential patient–doctor relationship 
with anyone with whom they initiate a medical encounter. This confidentiality serves to create a space 
in which a patient can trust the physician in a unique 
way. It may lead to the disclosure of very personal 
information during the routine course of medical 
care delivery. 
It is important to remember that confidentiality is 
not a privilege, and that there are occasions where the 
patient’s privacy comes into conflict with the public 
good and the physician must report to appropriate 
authorities. In the context of the military unit, this 
means that the commander retains a legal authority to 
access information which may impact the mission or 
safety within the unit. The medical officer is therefore 
obligated to disclose what may otherwise be protected 
information to the commander, despite constraints 
such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) or general patient confidentiality 
considerations.
One common situation that may cause divided loyalty occurs when a member of the unit develops a new 
diagnosis that is incompatible with continued service 
in the military. Regulations require the initiation of 
a process to evaluate that condition with the goal of 
either reassigning, retraining, or separating that service 
member from military service. This evaluation occurs 
through a Medical Evaluation Board (MEB), Physical Evaluation Board (PEB), or military occupational 
specialty (MOS)/Medical Retention Board (MMRB). In 
such a case, the command surgeon will be caught in 
the middle of competing interests. The surgeon must 
protect the interests of the command (eg, reassigning 
the service member in order to obtain a fully mission 
capable replacement), as well as the interests of the 
patient (eg, maintaining stability and employment 
while the service member receives therapy), taking into 
account the potential for long-term health compromising effects of continued military service. 
The command will have substantial interest in the 
progress of a service member’s treatment and disposition, particularly if their condition disqualifies them 
from continued service. Such interest will create innumerable situations in which the confidentiality of the 
patient–doctor relationship is violated, or at the very 
minimum challenged. It often takes extreme diligence 
on the part of the command surgeon to navigate this 
type of situation while maintaining the mutual respect 
and confidentiality of both command and patient. The 
command surgeon is encouraged to approach these 
challenges to communication in a methodical manner to facilitate the service member’s and command’s 
understanding of the system’s yet to be recognized 
but mutually beneficial outcomes to both parties. 
Outcomes from this process may be simultaneously 
disappointing but correct.
The military physician in the role of command 
surgeon has legal responsibility to the commander to 
disclose information regarding the service member 
patient, and to act on behalf of the commander to 
expedite case processing. Under command authority, 
the commander has the privilege to access medical 
information regarding his or her service members’ 
medical status even though he or she is not a medical 
provider involved in the patient’s care. Understanding 
this critical reality in advance can prevent the creation 
of unnecessary ethical dilemmas in the process of 
managing similar scenarios. Fortunately, the personal 
staff officer role, as defined in the United States Code, 
protects these communications with the commander. 
Establishing an effective personal staff officer relationship with the commander will serve the medical officer 
well in these situations.
Other situations that place the command surgeon 
into a difficult ethical dilemma may also arise. New 
medical officers have most likely taken oaths to Hippocrates as a physician (Attachment 8-4), and to the 
Constitution of the United States as an officer (Attachment 8-5). Managing these situations will require the 
medical officer to call upon his training as a physician, 
his understanding of his role as a staff officer, and his 
best judgment in doing what is right.
137
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Line Versus Staff Functions of the Medical Officer
Yet another aspect of the duality of the medical 
officer exists within the inherent functions of the command surgeon role that maintains both “line” and 
“staff” functions. Recall that the commander derives 
his authority from the president, which is transferred 
“down the line” to the current level commander and 
on to the subordinate commanders. Often referred to 
simply as “the line,” this function is directly involved 
in the execution of the task for the organization and 
illustrates the nature of military decision-making 
authority. Only the commander has the authority 
to direct actions within the unit. Similarly, clinical 
medical care is delivered under the authority of the 
medical officer’s medical license (not the commander’s 
authority) and can be considered a “line” function. 
This duality of the medical officer who maintains both 
“staff” and “line” functions is unique to the medical 
officer within the command. 
The command surgeon has both advisory and 
directive responsibilities hat are in many ways common to all staff officers. However, the sources of the 
authority in the command surgeon office are exclusive 
for each of the two functions. As licensed physicians, 
command surgeons have the authority to direct medical care within the unit. As staff officers, they advise 
the commander who retains the sole decision-making 
and implementation authority. 21 The difficulty for the 
command surgeon is to discern which hat he or she is 
wearing during the conduct of daily business, and to 
balance necessary medical authority against the commander’s command authority. This balance will shift 
based on the level of command. As medical officers are 
assigned to higher levels of command in their careers, 
work will typically shift toward the staff function, with 
less time and attention being given to primary healthcare. This also implies greater emphasis on leadership 
as the level of command increases.
The Technical Chain of Command
Because the medical decision-making authority derives separately from the command authority, and due 
to the technical nature of the myriad Health Service 
Support functional areas previously discussed, it is 
necessary within the context of a military unit for there 
to be a separate technical supervisory process from 
the chain of command (as is also necessary in other 
technically oriented staff officers). As discussed earlier, 
a surgeon is assigned at all levels of command. This 
implies that the command surgeon will normally have 
a senior surgeon assigned to the next higher level of 
command, as well as having several subordinate medical elements at lower levels of command for which he 
or she maintains a technical supervisory responsibility 
(Figure 8-5). While the command surgeon reports to 
and takes orders only from the commander, the senior 
surgeon is a source for guidance, mentorship, and technical oversight. Similarly, the command surgeon will 
endeavor to provide mentorship, training programs, 
and clinical oversight to those junior medical officers 
and non-commissioned officers in subordinate units. 
This hierarchy of medical providers is referred to as 
the “technical chain of command” and mirrors the 
chain of command. On occasion, the technical chain 
of command can place the medical officer in a position 
of split loyalty or responsibility.
In the course of daily routine medical operations, 
the command surgeon is often required to provide direction to subordinate medical elements to accomplish 
specific objectives, and to gather certain data through 
reporting. However, the senior command surgeon 
does not have decision-making authority over the 
subordinate medical element. Simply stated, surgeons 
don’t report to surgeons. The subordinate medical element must take orders only from its own commander. 
Nevertheless, it is incumbent on the command surgeon 
to follow the technical guidance and direction of the 
higher level surgeon as much as is possible, without 
violating the commander’s intent. Differences in orders 
through the chain of command and guidance from the 
technical chain of command may potentially conflict 
with each other. Awareness of this relationship is critical to resolving these conflicts without compromising 
the mission. The standing advice is to report directly 
to the unit commander, but work with the technical 
chain to the extent possible. 
Figure 8-5. The technical medical staff (surgeon cell) also 
reports to higher level headquarters to ensure communication of relevant medical information. Directives and guidance may be supplied from higher headquarters down to 
units as well.
138
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Learning to balance the requirements through the 
technical chain and the command chain can be challenging. However, the technical chain of command ensures 
that for junior physicians, there is always a medical 
mentor to assist in times of difficulty. Professional 
mentorship is a key role within the chain of command 
and good command surgeons will reach out to their 
subordinate surgeons in the technical chain of command 
in order to provide professional guidance and assistance 
when necessary in accomplishing the medical mission. 
THE COMMANDER’S EXPECTATIONS OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER
The best way to gain an understanding of the commander’s expectations of the medical officer joining the 
unit as command surgeon, is simply to ask. Although 
this may sound incredibly simple, it may come as a 
surprise how infrequently a new command surgeon, 
particularly one that is relatively new to the military, 
makes the effort to sit down with his command team to 
simply understand what they expect. When notified of 
the assignment, incoming command surgeons should 
reach out to the commander, executive officer (the 
likely reporting chain), and command sergeant major 
or command master chief to discuss their expectations. 
This may afford an opportunity to identify problems 
or challenges early on that may need to be attended 
to immediately. It will also provide an opportunity 
to establish a relationship and gain trust, particularly 
with the commander, to fulfill the role as a personal 
staff officer. 
At the Uniformed Services University, former 
line commanders are often invited to speak with the 
students about their expectations of their medical 
officers. In an informal dialogue, they are asked to 
speak about successes and failures of medical officers 
with whom they have worked, either as fellow staff 
officers or as their commander. The commonalities 
among commanders’ opinions are striking. Simply 
put, a line commander expects his or her medical officer to understand medicine and attend to medicine, 
but also to understand officership and integrate with 
his or her team (the command staff). The commander 
expects the medical officer to be a doctor, and a good 
one, but also expects the doctor to be a good officer. 
And while most commanders will recognize that 
this may take some time, as many of the skills will be 
new and underdeveloped, he or she also understands 
that the medical officer, like the rest of the unit’s staff 
officers, is intelligent, adaptable, and can learn the 
language quickly. The expectations can be summarized as follows:
 
• You are my expert on all things medically 
related.
 
• You are my link to the medical world.
 
• You are a leader – physically fit and morally 
straight. 
 
• You know the military decision-making process and your role in it.
 
• You are a team player, and always know my 
soldiers and families come first.
 
• You are willing to do things outside of your 
lane.
 
• You are flexible and anticipate needs.
 
• You effectively communicate to me – translate 
the “medical speak” into laymen’s terms and 
articulate the “so what.”
 
• You bring solutions to problems.
 
• You continue to develop yourself professionally.
 
• You have fun!
Professional Relationship with the Commander
Like the chaplains, medical officers hold a special 
role regarding their relationship to their commanders. 
A trusted medical officer provides the commander 
with both personal services (medical care) and professional services. This includes personal psychological 
support. Depending on the commander’s style, the 
medical officer will often become a sounding board 
and confidant as a means of evaluating and reflecting 
on new ideas and options. Other inquires and interactions will include the commander seeking opinions on 
specific or general communication techniques including effectiveness, positive and negative impact, and 
forecasts about leadership outcomes. The commander 
will seek guidance and expectations about individual 
and organizational behaviors and responses. Be prepared to provide this support as it may be the medical 
officer’s most critical responsibility. 
SUMMARY 
The command surgeon role is an intricate one. So 
intricate, that it can in fact be quite overwhelming as 
the new medical officer attempts in good faith to assimilate the recommendations and model of the good 
command surgeon. Medical skills, military skills, and 
leadership are balanced in the effective command 
surgeon who is truly integrated with his unit as part 
of the command staff. 
139
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Serving as a command staff officer may easily be 
the highlight of the military medical officer’s career. 
This role is unique and embodies military service for 
the physician. It affords the opportunity to positively 
impact the mission and better the lives of the service 
members in the unit, while at the same time providing a rich opportunity to develop as a leader and as 
a physician. By serving as command surgeons, new 
medical officers join a proud heritage of military 
medical officers who have preceded them. There will 
undoubtedly be fond memories of the experiences 
and relationships acquired in the unit. That history 
should be honored through personal development 
as a complete military medical officer, fully prepared 
to support the commander in accomplishing his/her 
mission.
REFERENCES
 
1. US Department of the Army. Army Health System. Washington DC: DA; 2013. Field Manual 4-02:
 
2. Letterman J. Medical recollections of the Army of the Potomac. New York, NY: Appleton; 1866.
 
3. US Department of the Army. Commander and Staff Organization and Operations. Washington DC: DA; 2014. Field Manual 
6-0, paragraph 2-114. 
 
4. 10 USC §164. Commanders of Combatant Commands: Assignment; Powers and Duties, 1986.
 
5. 10 USC, Chapter 47. Uniform Code of Military Justice. 
 
6. US Department of the Army. Army Command Policy. Washington, DC: DA; 2014. Army Regulation 600 – 20.
 
7. US Department of Defense. Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States. Washington DC: DoD; 2013 Incorporating 
Change 1, 12 July 2017. Joint Publication 1.
 
8. Dunnaback J. Command responsibility: a small unit leader’s perspective. Northwestern Law Review. 2013;108:1385–1422.
 
9. 10 USC §3583. Requirement of Exemplary Conduct, 1997.
 10. US Department of the Army. Commander and Staff Organization and Operations. Washington, DC: DA; 2014. Field Manual 
6-0. 
 11. Stratton N. 7 Ways to Fail as a Staff Officer. http://www.themilitaryleader.com/7-ways-to-fail-as-a-staff-officer/. Accessed 26 Mar, 2017. 
 12. Jomini A-H. The Art of War. Mendell GH, Craighill WP, trans. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott; 1862.
 13. Von Clausewitz C. On War. Howard M, Paret P, trans. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1989.
 14. Woodson J. Becoming a battalion surgeon. Lecture presented at: Tzameret Program; April 29, 2015; Hebrew University, 
Jerusalem.
 15. O’Connor F. Military medical practice and leadership program of instruction. Lecture presented at: Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences Faculty Assembly, 2014; Bethesda, MD.
 16. Nayar V. Three differences between managers and leaders. Harvard Business Review Website. https://hbr.org/2013/08/
tests-of-a-leadership-transiti. Published August 2, 2013. Accessed June 19, 2018.
 17. Rush B. Directions for preserving the health of soldiers. Lancaster; 1778. 
 18. Brocklesby R. Oeconomical and medical observations in two parts. From the Year 1758 to the Year 1763, Inclusive. London; 
1764.
 19. Pringle J. Observations on the Diseases of the Army: In Camp and Garrison; In 3 Parts; With an Appendix. London: Millar; 
1753.
140
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 20. Risk Management. Washington DC: Air, Land, and Sea application center; 2001. FM 3-100. 12, MCRP 5-12. 1C, NTTP 
5-03. 5, AFTTP(I) 3-2. 34
 21. Sepanic J. The Dilemma over Medical Command and Control [master’s thesis]. Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: United States 
Army Command and General Staff College; 2008.
141
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Attachment 8-1 
ON LOYALTY AS A STAFF OFFICER
(Vignette from a young command surgeon)
Problem 
As a brand-new battalion surgeon coming out of internship, one of the first challenges I ran into upon assignment to the battalion was a recognition that our unit was NOT medically “ready.” This battalion was designated 
for rapid deployment and had a continual stream of small-unit downrange deployments. There was a constant 
command focus on medical readiness, which was a prerequisite for deployment. Despite this focus, I discovered that immunization status was being reported as much higher than it actually was. Medical records review 
revealed that the reported 98% to 100% compliance rate was in fact as low as 30%!
 I had to implement new plans and programs to correct this shortfall, which required a tremendous amount 
of boots-on-the-ground work by our battalion medical section. My team was constantly bombarded by “hey 
you” from companies, teams, and individuals who needed support in getting the various immunizations and 
other preventive medicine items addressed. Though this was at my request (be careful what you ask for!) and 
was supported by the command, it interfered with my ability to do my basic staff work and meet my general 
command responsibilities.
Solution 
Trying to think outside the box, I determined that the best way to solve this problem was to compartmentalize the time involved in the immunization and medical readiness program so that we could maintain focus and 
improve efficiency across all required tasks. I had to protect time to do my planning and staff work while still 
maintaining availability to the 350+ members of the battalion who needed my time to meet their pre-deployment 
requirements. 
My creative solution was to establish “office hours” for immunizations. Without discussing it with my executive officer (my immediate supervisor), I posted on my door a fairly simple and streamlined set of office hours 
during which I would make my team exclusively available for immunizations and preventive medicine work. 
Based on the previously encountered routine workflow and traffic, I believed that this would be both reasonable 
and effective in meeting the needs of the subordinate units.
New Problem 
Immediately I felt better about my task accomplishment. I was more prepared for my briefings and I felt my 
workflow was more balanced and timely for me and my team (the battalion medical section). However, it wasn’t 
long before I was summoned by a very unhappy executive officer who had just “heard it” from the commander. 
While I was reasonably well respected by this time in the command as a supportive “Doc,” the company commanders and by proxy the battalion commander were not just upset, but rather were IRATE about my new office 
hours. The hours did not conform to the unpredictable pre-deployment training schedules that the subordinate 
units were forced to live by. I was immediately labeled as “self-serving” and “unsupportive.” 
I immediately remove my office hours, made an announcement at the next command staff meeting that anybody that needed an immunization or other medical support could come by ANY time during work hours, or 
after hours with prior coordination. Needless to say my creative solution backfired on me and presented a new 
challenge of restoring trust with the unit.
Lesson Learned 
It is critical to remember that your role is as a supporting character in the cast of the battalion, and that the 
perception of support is perhaps more important than the reality. Loyalty to the team means, among other things, 
that you understand your role on the team.
142
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Attachment 8-2 
MISSION BRIEFING FORMAT
 
1. SITUATION
 
a. Enemy Forces
 
b. Friendly Forces
 
c. Attachments and Detachments
 
2. MISSION
 
a. Who 
 
b. What 
 
c. When 
 
d. Where 
 
e. Why
 
3. EXECUTION
 
a. Concept of the Operation
 
b. Maneuver
 
c. Fires
 
d. Tasks to Maneuver Units
 
e. Tasks to Combat Support Units
 
f. Coordinating Instructions
 
4. SUSTAINMENT
 
a. General
 
b. Material and Services
 
c. Supply
 
d. Transportation
 
e. Services
 
f. Maintenance
 
g. Medical
 
h. Personnel
 
i. Miscellaneous
 
5. COMMAND AND SIGNAL
Adapted from: US Army. Ranger Handbook. Fort Benning, Georgia: 
US Army Infantry School; 2017. TC 3-21-76.
Attachment 8-3 
DECISION BRIEFING FORMAT
INTRODUCTION
 
a. Greeting
 
b. Type and Classification
 
c. Purpose and Scope
 
d. Statement of the problem (mission/
commander’s intent)
 
e. The recommendation
MAIN BODY
 
a. Facts (+ and -)
 
b. Assumptions
COURSES OF ACTION (COA)
 
Discussion of the various options
ANALYSIS
 
a. Evaluation criteria 
 
b. Advantages and disadvantages of each 
COA
COMPARISON
 
Show how the courses of action rate against 
the evaluation criteria
CONCLUSION
 
a. Describe why the selected solution is preferred
 
b. Ask for questions
 
c. Restatement of the recommendation for 
approval/disapproval 
 
d. Request a decision
Adapted from: US Department of Defense. Joint Planning. Washington DC: DoD; 2017. Joint Publication 5-0.
143
The Medical Officer on the Commander’s Staff
Attachment 8-4
HIPPOCRATIC OATH, MODERN VERSION1:
I swear to fulfill, to the best of my ability and judgment, this covenant:
I will respect the hard-won scientific gains of those physicians in whose steps I walk, and gladly share such 
knowledge as is mine with those who are to follow.
I will apply, for the benefit of the sick, all measures which are required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and therapeutic nihilism.
I will remember that there is art to medicine as well as science, and that warmth, sympathy, and understanding may outweigh the surgeon’s knife or the chemist’s drug.
I will not be ashamed to say “I know not,” nor will I fail to call in my colleagues when the skills of another 
are needed for a patient’s recovery.
I will respect the privacy of my patients, for their problems are not disclosed to me that the world may know. 
Most especially must I tread with care in matters of life and death. If it is given me to save a life, all thanks. But 
it may also be within my power to take a life; this awesome responsibility must be faced with great humbleness 
and awareness of my own frailty. Above all, I must not play at God.
I will remember that I do not treat a fever chart, a cancerous growth, but a sick human being, whose illness 
may affect the person’s family and economic stability. My responsibility includes these related problems, if I 
am to care adequately for the sick.
I will prevent disease whenever I can, for prevention is preferable to cure.
I will remember that I remain a member of society, with special obligations to all my fellow human beings, 
those sound of mind and body as well as the infirm.
If I do not violate this oath, may I enjoy life and art, respected while I live and remembered with affection 
thereafter. May I always act so as to preserve the finest traditions of my calling and may I long experience the 
joy of healing those who seek my help.
This modern version of the Hippocratic Oath was written in 1964 by Louis Lasagna, Academic Dean of the School of Medicine at Tufts 
University, and is used in many medical schools today. 2
REFERENCES
 
1. Lasagna L. A Modern Hippocratic Oath. Tufts University School of Medicine. 1964.
 
2. Miles SH. The Hippocratic Oath and the Ethics of Medicine. 1st ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004.
144
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Attachment 8-5
THE OATH OF COMMISSIONED OFFICERS 
I, _____ (state your name), having been appointed a (rank) in the Army of the United States, as indicated 
above in the grade of _____ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution 
of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to 
the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservations or purpose of evasion; and 
that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office upon which I am about to enter; So help 
me God. 1
REFERENCE
 
1. 5 USC §3331. Oath of Office. Washington DC, 1966. 
