415
Family Readiness
Chapter 29
FAMILY READINESS
ADAM K. SAPERSTEIN, MD*; TERESA COMBS, PhD†; RYAN LANDOLL, PhD‡; and REGINA P. OWEN, DNP§
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
Family
Family Readiness
Familiy Resilience
COMMON STRESSORS THAT INFLUENCE FAMILY READINESS
Geographic Separation
Permanent Change of Station Moves
Role Conflict
Career Obstacles
Families with Dual or Single Military Parents
IMPACT ON MILITARY CHILDREN
Young Children
Adolescent Children
Children With Special Needs
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING FAMILY READINESS
Preventive Strategies
Reactive Strategies 
FAMILY READINESS—THE ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Direct Support for Military Families
Coordinating Care
Educating Military Unit Leadership
FAMILY READINESS RESOURCES
SUMMARY
*Commander, Medical Corps, US Navy; Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, Maryland 
†Assistant Professor, Daniel K. Inouye Graduate School of Nursing, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
‡Major, United States Air Force, Biomedical Sciences Corps and Assistant Professor, Department of Family Medicine, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
§Major, United States Air Force, Medical Corps and Mental Health Clinic OIC, 436 MDG/Dover Air Force Base, Delaware 
416
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Consider the phrase “military family.” What does 
this mean to you? Create a mental image—the people 
in the family, their ages, genders, where they live, 
what they do, etc. Now imagine that a service member in that family is about to deploy for 12 months 
and one or more members of the family has come to 
you for advice on how to cope with this deployment. 
What resources would you offer? How would you 
counsel this family? In what ways would you wish 
you had counseled them well before they learned of 
the deployment? Do you have preconceived notions 
that affect your answers? Assisting families to prepare for challenges is an important role for military 
healthcare providers. Working to gain that skill is 
the most important first step in building competence 
and confidence. This chapter defines family and family readiness, identifies common stressors that can 
erode family readiness, and shares strategies and 
resources that are likely to help families improve 
resilience. 
DEFINITIONS
Family
The definition of family has changed in a variety 
of ways over time. 1,2 Consequently, the discussion of 
the topic of family readiness is inherently tied to a 
consideration and awareness of these varied definitions. Without such an analysis, any effort to provide 
comprehensive care for military families, including 
supporting family readiness, would be fruitless. 
In the United States in 1950, the word “family” 
would most often refer to a husband, wife, and their 
children. The use of such a limited definition was based 
on many factors, including cultural norms and the assumptions and biases of the individual who elected to 
use it. This brings up a critical point—the only way to 
understand what someone else means when they say 
family (or anything else for that matter) is to ask. The 
greatest two tools a provider has are questions and 
engaged listening. Helpful questions to keep in mind 
include, “Who makes up your family?” or “Who is in 
your family?” These questions are effective because 
they are open ended and specific, a combination that 
allows patients to help healthcare providers understand 
them and their needs. By contrast, a question such as, 
“Who lives at home with you?” is open-ended but does 
not specifically ask about a patient’s definition of family. A closed-ended question such as, “How is your wife 
doing?” is specific but makes assumptions about the 
marital status of a patient and the gender of a patient’s 
spouse, both of which may impede providers’ ability 
to develop rapport, limiting a patient’s opportunity to 
help providers better understand their situation. 
When working to learn about someone’s family, 
consider the following guidance.
Do:
 
• Ask open-ended questions about who is in 
their family.
 
• Keep an open mind because the patient’s family may include people (and even pets) that 
you had not previously considered as being 
part of a family.
 
• Be aware of and account for personal biases 
and assumptions about what constitutes a 
family.
 
• Ask about a patient’s sense of safety (physical 
as well as emotional) in the context of their 
family.
Don’t:
 
• Ask leading questions such as, “Things are 
going well at home, right?”
 
• Assume you understand the relationship 
between the patient and members of their 
family.
 
• Assume that the patient’s outward appearance 
(affect) correlates to their internal feelings 
(mood) when talking about their family. 
Following these recommendations will allow 
medical officers to provide compassionate and comprehensive care that is tailored to the unique needs of 
the patient. 
Family Readiness 
Military units were once considered to include only 
the military members of that unit. Over the past decades, the concept of a military unit has changed and 
now includes the military members and their families. 3 
This change is a result of the recognition that family 
factors can have a significant impact on a unit’s ability 
to achieve its mission and the well-being of the military 
as an enterprise. 4 Consequently, helping families to better cope with the stressors of military life is important 
for any military unit. 
Each of the military services recognizes family 
readiness as an important goal. It is defined by the 
417
Family Readiness
Department of Defense as “the state of being prepared 
to effectively navigate the challenges of daily living 
experienced in the unique context of military service, 
to include: mobility and financial readiness, mobilization and deployment readiness, and personal and 
family life readiness.”4 Some challenges are unique to 
military family life (eg, deployments and permanent 
changes of duty station) and others are not (eg, having 
family members with special needs or living remotely 
from one’s extended family). All have the potential to 
impact the family, the service member, and the military 
service. Whether or not the challenges faced by a family are military unique, military healthcare providers 
play an active role in helping enhance that family’s 
readiness. At the core of this endeavor is the concept 
of family resilience. 
Family Resilience
Family resilience comprises the ability to withstand 
and rebound from disruptive life challenges and relies 
on positive adaptation within the context of substantial 
adversity. 5 Although resilience was initially viewed as 
an innate trait, subsequent research has demonstrated 
this to be incorrect. 6 Resilience is now viewed as a function of the interplay between multiple risk factors and 
protective processes over time. 7 The following vignette 
illustrates this concept. 
A family composed of a husband, wife, and three children 
ages 11, 7, and 2 are stationed in rural North Carolina. 
The mother, an active duty service member, deployed to 
a war zone where she stepped on an improvised explosive 
device and lost most of her right lower leg. She was medically evacuated to Maryland, where her injuries required a 
below-the-knee amputation. Her family moved to be with 
her in Maryland. The two oldest children were enrolled in 
a new school and the 2-year-old was placed in daycare on 
base. The husband spends most of each day helping his wife 
with her recovery while also trying to rent the house in 
North Carolina, tend to his elderly parents in Alaska, and 
manage the family’s finances.
It is easy to identify multiple risk factors that could 
degrade this family’s resilience, including the following:
 
• decreased time the service member spent with 
the family during pre-deployment, 
 
• training in the months and weeks preceding 
deployment,
 
• geographical separation of the family’s active 
duty service member,
 
• a period of single parenthood during the deployment,
 
• geographic separation from extended family 
with healthcare needs, 
 
• financial challenges,
 
• changes in school,
 
• loss of friendship support networks, 
 
• possible loss of primary means of income if the 
service member is separated from the service, 
 
• possible loss in income if the husband was 
employed before moving to Maryland,
 
• potential change in self-perception of all members of the family, and 
 
• uncertainty concerning the current situation. 
Just as understanding the factors that could impact 
a family’s resilience in the midst of a crisis is important in order to care for them, so too is understanding 
a family’s past experiences coping with stressors. To 
do this requires: 
 
• identifying the stressors they have faced in 
the past,
 
• learning how they coped with these stressors,
 
• understanding how they perceive their experience coping with these stressors,
 
• determining what support they received and 
whether that support was helpful, 
 
• inquiring about how members of the family 
interacted with each other during these times, 
and
 
• identifying whether coping with these stressors heightened their sense of vulnerability or 
enhanced their resilience and family readiness. 
In the example above, the family is in the midst of 
a crisis. Ideally, families have the requisite support 
and skills to build resilience and avert such crises 
before they develop. The strategies used to achieve 
this outcome are called “preventive strategies.” Given 
that not all crises can be averted, we also need strategies that help families cope in the midst of a crisis. 
These are called “reactive strategies.” In this context, 
answers to the following questions are likely to help 
you best care for families and enhance their resilience 
and readiness:
 
• What are the common factors that affect military family readiness? 
 
• What are the “preventive strategies” known 
to enhance readiness before a crisis? 
 
• What are the “reactive strategies” known to 
be effective in the midst of a crisis?
 
• What is the role of the military healthcare 
provider in implementing these strategies? 
418
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
COMMON STRESSORS THAT INFLUENCE FAMILY READINESS
Military families are faced with a host of stressors 
that can challenge the stability and fluidity of the family structure; affect the family’s function and dynamic; 
create disruptions in the family unit; and potentially 
compromise the family as a whole. Over time, these 
stressors can begin to exert a significant toll on the 
well-being of each family member and the relationships within a military family. 
The Holmes and Rahe Social Readjustment Rating 
Scale for adults8 and the Coddington Life Change Unit 
Value Scale for Children9 serve as helpful references for 
identifying and understanding stressors. Each identifies life events that are associated with significant stress 
(eg, death of a family member, marriage, or change 
in financial state), ranked from most to least stressful. While the order of stressfulness of these events 
will vary from person to person, having background 
knowledge about factors that more commonly impact 
stress, resilience, and readiness can facilitate military 
healthcare providers’ attunement to the needs of the 
individual patients and the community they serve. 
Among the stressors included in these scales, the 
following are unique to and/or more commonly encountered in military families as compared with their 
civilian counterparts. 
Geographic Separation
Military families may be geographically separated 
for a variety of reasons. Some of the most common are 
the following10:
 
• deployment of the active duty service member; 
 
• assignment of the active duty service member 
to a location where, for a variety of reasons 
(including the medical needs of a family 
member), the rest of the family cannot go; or
 
• a family decision to remain in place when the 
active duty service member is assigned to a 
new duty station (including marital separations or divorce).
This geographic separation, especially when prolonged, has a negative impact on family homeostasis, 
is associated with an increase in marital discord, and 
is associated with an increase in anxiety in both the 
service member and the family. 11 Common sources 
of anxiety for spouses and children include fear that 
their loved one may not return; fear that their loved 
one may return with physical and/or mental injuries; 
worry about an inability to cope in the absence of 
the service member; and fear that relationships and 
intimacy will be negatively impacted by the lack of 
proximity, among others. 12 Among service members 
who are geographically separated from their family, common sources of anxiety include worry about 
missing important milestones in their children’s and 
spouses’ life and guilt that they have left a heavy burden on their spouse. 12 
When a service member leaves their family for 
a prolonged period of time, and when they return, 
family dynamics adjust to that change. Both of these 
events create stress. While filling the void left by 
departure of the service member is often assumed to 
be a negative event and their return a positive one, 
there are a number of scenarios in which this may 
not be the case. First, the service member’s interaction with one or more members of the family may be 
stress-inducing, and their departure may be seen as 
a positive. Second, the stress of the service member’s 
geographic separation may result in family member 
roles and responsibilities being more thoughtfully 
considered than in the past, resulting in a new family dynamic that members appreciate. Third, family 
members who are a part of the intentional development of this new dynamic may feel more satisfied 
due to their participation in its development. Fourth, 
family members’ new roles often involve greater responsibility and autonomy, enhancing their sense of 
motivation and satisfaction. 13 
Family members’ appreciation of the new family dynamic may be misinterpreted to be a lack of 
appreciation for the returning service member. For 
those service members who deployed and view 
themselves as returning heroes, feeling more appreciated by strangers than by family members can be 
especially painful. Helping all members of the family 
understand common challenges during reintegration, 
and working with them to develop effective coping 
strategies, requires a thoughtful and intentional 
approach. One helpful resource with an excellent 
section on reintegration is the Military One Source 
deployment page (http://www.militaryonesource.
mil/deployment). 14
Permanent Change of Station Moves 
On average, military members move every 2 to 3 
years. 10,15 These moves are usually to a different state, 
and sometimes to a different country. Moves by civilian 
families are (on average) less than 20 times as common16 and are less likely to be followed by subsequent 
moves in the ensuing years. 
419
Family Readiness
In addition to the increased frequency of moves, 
military families have far less control over a number 
of factors related to the move, including the location 
to which they move, the timing of that move, and the 
frequency of subsequent moves. Moves are often to 
locations where the family has not previously lived 
and where the military member, their spouse, and 
their children lack social connections. 17 Moves can 
occur in the middle of the school year, which can 
be particularly challenging for school-age children 
because it adds another transition with which they 
must cope. Curriculum misalignment between their 
old and new schools can also cause stress because 
children may be behind (and overwhelmed) or ahead 
(and bored) when starting in the new school. 17 These 
factors may in part explain why military families opt 
to homeschool their children twice as frequently as 
their civilian counterparts. 18 
Subsequent moves can occur just 1 year after arrival, 
bringing into focus the fallacy of the use of the word 
“permanent” in the term “permanent change of station.” In addition, moves rarely bring a family back to 
a previous duty station, and even when they do, the 
community at that duty station has typically changed 
markedly due to other families’ moves. Another 
significant difference between civilian and military 
family moves is that military families are responsible 
for completing myriad mandated checklists before, 
during, and after relocation. 
Frequent permanent change of station moves typically have economic implications beyond the simple 
costs of the move. While many moving costs are borne 
by the military service, some are not. These costs may 
include: new items that cannot be shipped from one’s 
prior location (eg, household items, food, liquids in 
open containers), new clothes based on differences in 
climate, selling vehicles at one’s old duty station and 
purchasing new vehicles at the new duty station, and 
loss of money from one’s security deposit if renting, 
among others. In addition, loss of income earned by civilian family members can be substantial. Perhaps the 
biggest economic issue related to a permanent change 
of station move is that of home ownership. While there 
are some good reasons to consider purchasing a home, 
military members and their families face a significant 
disincentive to build equity in the housing market. This 
disincentive stems from many factors, including lack 
of control over the timing of a subsequent move and 
the potential need to sell the house at an inopportune 
time; the potential need to rent the house at a loss; 
and perhaps most significantly, the potential loss of 
a security clearance as a result of an inability to pay 
one’s debts (including a mortgage). Many military 
families choose to buy homes and benefit economically 
from that decision, but the uncertainly of that outcome 
causes it to remain a significant stressor for military 
families, even when the outcome is a good one. 
The stress caused by permanent change of station 
moves can negatively affect family members and result 
in physical, social, and psychological disturbances 
including depression, headaches, and an increased 
incidence of allergic rhinitis and heart disease. 19,20 
The stress of a move, as well as the discordant ways 
in which individual family members may cope, sometimes contributes to interpersonal conflict resulting in 
frequent arguments and family rancor. Children are 
impacted as well, and respond to the way their parents 
talk about and react to the move. 
Sadly, even when such symptoms are recognized, 
there are a number of potential barriers to family 
members’ getting needed medical attention. These 
hurdles may include:
 
• Transportation. The family may only have one 
vehicle with them on arrival to their new duty 
station, which the active duty member uses 
to get to work, causing difficulty in getting 
to appointments. 
 
• In-processing. There may be a perception of 
pressure from the command to prioritize administrative check-in responsibilities before 
seeking healthcare.
 
• Mental health stigma. Family members may 
feel uncomfortable about seeking care for 
mental health concerns.
 
• Medical providers. It may take some time 
to find a new primary care manager and 
establish new relationships with healthcare 
providers. 
The last issue can be particularly stressful for those 
with complex and chronic health conditions, including children with special needs, for whom continuity 
of care and timely access to care can be particularly 
important. 
Role Conflict
American views on roles in families are changing. 
Traditional views of family included a presumption 
that the husband served as “breadwinner” and the 
wife as “homemaker.” More modern views recognize diversity in family composition and respect 
the value of shared roles and egalitarianism. 21 In a 
military family context, military members and their 
spouses may be in situations in which their actual role 
is not well aligned with the role they believe is their 
responsibility. This conflict is often related to one’s 
420
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
perceived gender role and can cause internal turmoil 
and degrade resilience. 
Men comprise approximately 8% of the total 
number of military spouses,22 a 3. 5-fold increase over 
the past 30 years. 22,23 Consequently, there has been a 
significant increase in the number of stay-at-home 
husbands and fathers, consistent with the national 
trend. 15 For a male stay-at-home military spouse with 
traditional attitudes about gender roles, not being 
the breadwinner can be difficult. This may be more 
problematic when living in a military community in 
which there are relatively few stay-at-home fathers. 
In addition to the social stigma against the idea of a 
stay-at-home father, most military spouse support 
organizations were designed for supporting the needs 
of women. 22 
It may be equally challenging for female military 
spouses who have modern views about their role to 
cope with not being a breadwinner for the family. This 
can be exacerbated when living within a larger military 
community that they perceive to have traditional views 
of gender roles. 
The stress associated with incongruity between 
one’s perceived gender role and one’s actual role is 
not limited to military spouses. Service members, regardless of sex, also must cope with these challenges, 
including a potential sense of guilt for not playing a 
more active role in the care of children. 
Career Obstacles
Military spouse employment is a unique stressor 
that can cause a ripple effect within the family system. 
For the employed spouse, geographic moves result in 
their transferring within the same company (if possible) or quitting their job and seeking new employment. This can be far more difficult than it might seem. 
First, moves are based on the needs of the military and 
may place the military spouse in a location where their 
skill set is not in demand. Second, even if their skill 
set is in demand, competition for open jobs can limit 
employment opportunities and result in spouses accepting positions at a lower level than the one they left, 
impeding their career progression. 24 Third, even when 
offered a new job, the military family with children 
must find a childcare facility with openings, and the 
military spouse may have to wait for an opening for a 
new job. Even when a new job is identified, the military 
spouse may discover that the cost of childcare at their 
new location is greater than their income. Due to these 
and other factors, military spouses are employed less 
frequently, have lower income, and work fewer hours 
when compared with their civilian counterparts with 
similar education levels. 24-26 This can be quite frustrating and negatively impact individual and family 
resilience and readiness.
Young military families are particularly susceptible 
to anxiety and stress related to spouse career obstacles. 
The junior military member’s income may be inadequate to ensure family financial stability. As a result, 
dual incomes are often necessary. As noted above, frequent relocations make continuity of employment and 
career progression difficult. 27 In addition, completing 
a college degree (something strongly associated with 
economic success28) can be quite challenging. Although 
online college programs have made it easier for those 
who move frequently to complete their degree, spouses 
who attended brick-and-mortar universities may 
struggle to find a college or university that accepts the 
previous credits attained.
Even those with advanced degrees face challenges. 
First, there may be a limited number of job opportunities in the vicinity of one’s new duty station. Second, 
spouses whose professional practice requires state 
licensure (such as social workers, doctors, nurses, 
lawyers, and teachers) may find that the governing 
regulations and professional requirements of the state 
or country to which they have moved require additional certifications. These additional requirements, 
in addition to administrative hurdles and costs, may 
delay a military spouse’s ability to gain employment 
in their new location. 
All of these barriers to spouse career development 
can impact the family as a unit. This may negatively 
impact the service member’s job performance and 
career progression, creating an additional hurdle to 
families trying to develop financial stability. In addition, it is likely to result in decreased family resilience 
and readiness; decreased sense of self-worth on the 
part of the spouse29; and increased levels of anxiety 
in all family members. The issue may contribute to a 
decision to separate from military service prior to the 
attainment of military retirement benefits. 25
Families with Dual or Single Military Parents 
Families with dual military parents face unique 
challenges. These can include: 
 
• the need to rely on outside agencies for child 
care and transportation; 
 
• the possibility of both parents being geographically separated from the family, occasionally 
at the same time; 
 
• the possibility of parents receiving assignments at different locations, thus forcing a 
separation of the family unit; and 
 
• conflict that can arise in situations where a de421
Family Readiness
sire for career progression comes into conflict 
with the needs of the family, one’s partner, or 
a desire to keep the family unit together.
In the face of these challenges, families typically 
seek to develop and sustain support structures to buoy 
them in times of need, but developing such a structure, 
especially when living a nomadic life, requires effort. 
Grandparents or other extended family members serve 
as a potential source for such support, but can face challenges in accessing military services on behalf of the 
family, particularly if serving as alternative caregivers 
while parents are deployed. 30 Additionally, frequent 
relocations can make it difficult for military families to 
develop and maintain close relationships, which can 
exacerbate feelings of isolation. Fortunately, fellow 
military families tend to have an understanding of 
these challenges and support one another. However, 
when living in a predominately civilian community, 
where a military family can be perceived as transient, 
finding such support can be more challenging. 
Families with a single military parent face challenges of their own. One of these is the need to balance 
childcare responsibilities with a responsibility to the 
military organization. 31 These two responsibilities are 
inherently intermeshed. Focusing on work responsibilities usually leads to career progression, which 
improves the ability to care (economically) for children, 
and may also offer the opportunity to assume positions 
with greater work hour flexibility. At the same time, 
having a sense that one’s children are well cared for 
allows one to focus more effectively at work. Another 
challenge is coordinating childcare and transportation, 
including finding care options that are conveniently 
located and affordable on a single income. 32 Deployments can place extreme hardship on families with a 
single military parent even if extended family members 
are available and willing to provide relief. 33,34 These 
hardships can impact both parents’ and children’s 
well-being before, during, and after the deployment. 
IMPACT ON MILITARY CHILDREN
Children are inherently affected by the realities of 
military family life. Relocations, deployments, and other factors create stressors that civilian families rarely, 
if ever, experience. Among the cohort of military children, young children, adolescents, and children with 
special needs are three subsets that may be especially 
impacted by the stressors of military life. 
Young Children 
Children under 6 years old are especially vulnerable when it comes to geographic separation. Young 
children are often confused about the cause of their 
parent’s absence and where they have gone; have 
challenges with trust; and often have an increase in 
cognitive, mood, and behavioral problems. 34 On return 
of the absent parent, young children often demonstrate increased attachment behaviors, developmental 
regression, and other distressed behavior. 35 With deployment, young children often fear for their parent’s 
safety. Although they may not fully understand the 
risks of deployment, the ubiquitous, sensationalized 
media coverage of today’s military conflicts can exacerbate this sense of fear. 
Adolescent Children
For adolescents, geographic separation and relocation are both major stressors. Adolescents, as compared 
with younger children, have a greater awareness of the 
risks posed when their parent is deployed, and less 
comfort sharing fears related to this awareness. This 
dichotomy can lead to feelings of loss, depression, 
anxiety, and thoughts of suicide. 36,37 Adolescents may 
have both concern for their deployed parents and a 
sense of increased responsibility for family members. 37 
Relocation can be especially stressful for adolescents 
because they are in a period of intense identity formation, which can be disrupted by geographic moves. 
Consequently, adolescents who have experienced a 
geographic move in the past year have a higher incidence of hyperactivity, mental illness, mood lability, 
substance use concerns, suicidality, and poor academic performance. 19,38 While this highlights the many 
short-term challenges faced by adolescents in military 
families who move, studies demonstrate that multiple 
moves over time, especially when military families 
are given the resources to support these moves, may 
promote resilience and not undermine development. 38
Children with Special Needs
Children with special needs may have particular 
difficulty with the frequent transitions that occur 
in military families. Consequently, some families 
elect to stay in one location while the military member takes orders to another location, trading the 
positives of geographic stability of the non-military 
spouse and children for the negatives of geographic 
separation. Those families who move with their 
military service member must ensure that the new 
duty station will be able to meet the needs of their 
422
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
child with special needs. The Exceptional Family 
Member Program (http://efmp.amedd.army.mil)39 
is a critical program designed to ensure that family members are stationed in locations where their 
special needs can be met. 
Even when relocating to a location where their family member’s special needs can be met, families face 
a number of challenges. First, many family members 
with special needs have a more difficult time adapting to a new environment. Second, there may be a 
delay between arrival and initiation of special needs 
services. Even when those services are initiated, they 
may be different from those received in the past due 
to differences in programs and services from state to 
state. These setbacks can be harmful to the child and 
create additional stressors for the family. 40 
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING FAMILY READINESS
When considering various strategies to help families 
enhance their readiness, it is important to recognize 
that there is no “one size fits all” approach. What works 
for one person in a given situation may or may not 
work for another person in a similar situation, even if 
those two people are in the same family. The reason is 
that each individual has their perspective, borne out of 
their own personal context, defined as the interwoven 
fabric of one’s unique and diverse life experiences. 41
The fact that one approach may not work for everyone in a given family can be frustrating, both for 
the healthcare provider and for family members. The 
common belief that the family member is not “trying 
hard enough” if they do not respond well to a strategy 
that works for others in the family is erroneous. This 
can compound the distress that patients experience. In 
addition to being faced with a significant life stressor, 
they also receive the message that they are not putting forth the effort needed to overcome it. This may 
cause feelings of worthlessness and shame in addition 
to what they may already be feeling, most commonly 
feelings of sadness and being overwhelmed. Explaining to members of a family that each individual copes 
in their own way and at their own pace normalizes this 
reality, can facilitate mutual support, and can enhance 
family readiness. 
One way to organize approaches to enhancing family readiness is to divide them into preventive strategies (those that enhance family readiness in advance of 
a stressor) and reactive strategies (those that enhance 
family readiness in the face of a stressor). 
Preventive Strategies
Facilitating Dialogue
In most cases, the best preventive strategy is to 
encourage family members to openly talk about anticipated challenges. As a military healthcare provider, 
starting with open-ended questions that ask about 
perceived family roles may help identify incongruence 
between individual family members’ perceptions and 
help identify anticipated difficulties.
Often, family members will be hesitant to discuss 
upcoming stressors, for several reasons. One is the 
simple fact that these conversations can be difficult 
and uncomfortable. Another is the potential concern 
of parents who may feel that talking about a stressor 
in advance will only increase the anxiety of their children about that stressor. These challenges are further 
complicated by the fact that for military families, 
some stressors (such as geographic separation) may 
be unanticipated. These situations can be highly variable and leave little time to proactively plan informed 
family discussions. 
Understanding family members’ reticence to discuss anticipated or upcoming stressors is an important 
first step toward encouraging positive prevention efforts. Consequently, healthcare providers may need 
to prompt this discussion, rather than assuming that 
family members will proactively have conversations 
with one another in advance. Helping to normalize 
the discomfort and emphasize the importance of these 
conversations is key. Additionally, providing developmentally appropriate language for all family members 
is usually very helpful and may allay anxieties. For 
example, explaining a deployment using phrases 
like “mommy’s going to war” or “dad’s got to fight 
for the country” can be especially anxiety provoking. 
Instead, an “ask–clarify–ask–answer” approach is 
recommended in the following four steps: 
 
1. Ask what the family members understand 
about the upcoming stressor. 
 
2. Clarify their thoughts and concerns about this 
stressor, using age-appropriate language. 
 
3. Ask what questions they have about this 
stressor.
 
4. Answer those questions, again using ageappropriate language.
Managing Uncertainty
Handling uncertainty can also be difficult. Parents 
may be hesitant to discuss with children a potential move or deployment that may be canceled or 
423
Family Readiness
changed, sometimes with unexpected time frame 
shifts. These are regular occurrences in a military 
community. For example, one family in which the father deployed and who had two young children, decided to create a paper chain that they hung around 
their living room. Each link in the chain represented 
one day that their father would be gone and each day 
they removed one link. One week before the anticipated end of the deployment, the father learned his 
deployment was being extended by 2 months. The 
children were devastated. The concept was a noble 
one—trying to help the children to make sense of 
the situation and have a better understanding that 
the deployment was not indefinite. Unfortunately, 
the discordance between expectations and reality 
in such a situation can easily push a family into a 
crisis. How can providers help parents find a balance between offering reassurance without making 
promises that they may not be able to keep? Some 
approaches include:
 
• Tell children the season, rather than specific 
dates the parent may return.
 
• Find an object of consistency—something that 
always moves with them from house to house, 
or an object that a parent and child can both 
share while being geographically separated. 
 
• Find a positive activity to look forward to 
as a family. Be careful to validate negative 
emotions and provide opportunity for family members to share concerns. Additionally, it is important to remain sensitive to the 
uncertainty that may be associated with the 
anticipated stressor. Identifying smaller but 
positive activities to engage in and look forward to (eg, writing letters, video chats, and 
one-on-one time with the parent at home), 
as opposed to bigger activities may be more 
effective. 
Expectation Management
Frustration within families often arises when there 
is incongruity between family members’ perceptions of 
the roles each family member plays and family members’ perceptions of how static or flexible those roles 
should be. For children and adults alike, divergent 
views of the roles of family members can be disorienting, especially in the context of geographic moves 
and geographic separation. As a military healthcare 
provider, the goal of facilitating a discussion about 
roles and role flexibility is not to encourage members to 
conform to a single view, but to help them understand 
others’ perspectives. 
In addition, it may be helpful to explain to 
patients that while consistency in roles can be 
reassuring, the ability to adapt to change through 
flexible family roles is often positively adaptive. 
For example, an adolescent who takes on additional 
responsibilities during a deployment may initially 
feel challenged by the need to adapt to a new role, 
but will often develop pride in their contributions 
and greater self confidence that helps them adapt 
to challenges in the future. When the deployed 
service member returns, however, their adolescent 
may be conflicted between being happy about their 
reunion, while struggling with frustration regarding reduction in autonomy and a decreased sense 
of contribution. Consciously acknowledging this as 
family is important. Having parents highlight the 
positive qualities developed and additional responsibilities demonstrated, while also acknowledging 
the loss of this expanded role, can go a long way to 
normalizing and mitigating the challenges of this 
adjustment period. 
Military healthcare providers should have discussions about family and family roles at a time 
when families are not in crisis. This offers a great 
opportunity for the family to anticipate how various stressors may affect each of them. Perhaps most 
importantly it allows each of them to manage their 
expectations, thus decreasing stress and enhancing 
resilience. These same strategies can be very helpful 
during times of service member reintegration. In addition, the following tips for facilitating reintegration 
may be helpful:
 
• Have discussions without distractions (television, phones, etc).
 
• Engage in closed-loop communication—state 
what you understand others to be saying to 
ensure mutual understanding and demonstrate respect.
 
• Set aside dedicated one-on-one time with each 
member of the family. 
Younger children may regress or display behaviors 
that are developmentally less mature than normal 
for them in an attempt to cope with challenges. 
Understanding this behavior as normal can allow a 
family to respond affirmatively rather than critically. 
However, given that military challenges such as deployment have been associated with mental health 
difficulties and developmental delays in children,42 
it is important for healthcare providers to routinely 
assess and be aware of these risks. In this way, a 
strengths-based approach to early intervention can 
be developed. 
424
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Psychological First Aid
Psychological first aid is a concept that that emphasizes meeting basic needs (eg, food, shelter, security) in 
the midst of a disaster,41 but also offers an opportunity 
for preventive interventions. Asking individuals what 
healthy eating and regular physical activity means to 
them is a respectful way to open the discussion about 
leading a healthy lifestyle without seeming condescending. In addition, asking patients what they do 
for stress reduction is recommended. Such questioning 
facilitates a dialogue regarding various physiological 
stress reduction mechanisms (eg, deep breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, and mindful meditation) 
that have been demonstrated to result in decreases in 
perceived stress reduction as well as cortisol levels. 43,44 
Reactive Strategies
When a family is in crisis, consider whether it is 
feasible for a family to incorporate any of the above 
preventive strategies. It can be difficult to establish 
new patterns of behavior during times of crisis. 
Consequently, developing a clear understanding of 
family roles and rapport with family members usually becomes the top priority. Next, incorporating 
psychological first aid is often quite helpful. The eight 
core actions of psychological first aid are as follows45:
 
1. contact and engagement,
 
2. safety and comfort,
 
3. stabilization,
 
4. information gathering,
 
5. practical assistance,
 
6. connection with social supports,
 
7. information on coping, and 
 
8. linkage with collaborative services.
In the midst of a crisis, it is critical to ensure that 
a family’s basic psychological needs are met and 
that social supports are put in place. This typically 
requires engagement with other healthcare providers 
to offer the family the interprofessional and interdisciplinary care they need. Within the Military Health 
System, most outpatient settings have embedded 
behavioral health professionals who can connect with 
TABLE 29-1 
ONLINE FAMILY READINESS RESOURCES
Organization
Website
Synopsis
Military Family Resources
After Deployment
https://www.afterdeployment.dcoe.
mil
Health and wellness resources for the military community.
Blue Star Families
https://www.bluestarfam.org
Resources, programs, and special opportunities for 
military families.
Everyone Serves
https://www.everyoneservesbook.
com/
Handbook for family and friends of service members during Pre-Deployment, Deployment and 
Reintegration
Military Family Books
https://www.militaryfamilybooks.
com
Books about the military and deployment for all 
family members.
Military One Source
https://www.militaryonesource.mil
Information on nearly every aspect of military life 
including deployment, reunion, relationships, 
grief, spouse employment & education, parenting 
and childhood services.
Military.com 
Military Deployment 
Center
https://www.military.com/
deployment
Service-specific deployment resources
National Military Family 
Association
www.militaryfamily.org
A wide range of robust and relevant resources for 
military families.
The American Military 
Partner Association
www.militarypartners.org
Resources for partners, spouses, families, and allies 
of LGBT service members/veterans.
(Table 29-1 continues)
425
Family Readiness
Military Spouse Resources
Military Spouse Employment Authority
https://www.fedshirevets.gov
Laws regarding military spouse employment benefits.
Military SOS
www.militarysos.com
Support and information resource for military 
spouses and significant others of all branches, 
around the world.
My Career Advancement 
Account
https://mycaa.militaryonesource.mil/
mycaa/
A $4,000 tuition assistance program provided by the 
DoD for spouses of service members E1-E5, O1-O2, 
and W1-W2.
Pat Tillman Foundation
www.pattillmanfoundation.org
Foundation that invests in military veterans and 
spouses through educational scholarships.
Military Children’s Resources
Military Child Education 
Coalition
www.militarychild.org
Tools and resources to ensure quality educational 
opportunities for all military-connected children 
affected by mobility, family separation, and transition.
Military Kids Connect
www.militarykidsconnect.dcoe.mil
Online community for military children; includes 
age-appropriate resources to support children 
dealing with the unique psychological challenges 
of military life.
Mental Health Resources
Military Crisis Line
https://www.veteranscrisisline.net
Confidential help for service members and their 
families.
National Child Traumatic 
Stress Network
www.nctsn.org
Resources for parents, teachers, caregivers, and professionals for helping children cope with a wide 
range of stressors.
National Suicide Prevention 
Lifeline
https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/
Confidential suicide prevention hotline available to 
anyone in suicidal crisis or emotional distress.
The Soldiers Project
https://www.thesoldiersproject.org
Free, confidential psychological services to US 
military veterans and their loved ones who have 
served at any time after September 11, 2001.
Table 29-1 continued
family members. Additionally, outside resources are 
available for helping children and families to cope 
with trauma. A list of suggested resources is available in Table 29-1. For the military medical officer 
at a remote duty station where there are no on-site 
mental health professionals, the best option may be 
to establish a method in advance (such as video chat) 
to connect a family struggling with a crisis with the 
care they need. 
In the midst of and immediately following a crisis, 
there is likely to be variation in the emotions felt and 
the speed with which those emotions are processed 
by different family members. Explaining that this 
variation is likely to occur and is normal can go a 
long way toward mitigating frustration and helping 
families work together and offer mutual support. 
Encouraging family members to share emotions 
with each other (without forcing sharing) will usually build resilience. Before starting this process, be 
mindful that family members may have grown up 
in an environment in which they never gained comfort with or learned the language needed to express 
emotions. In this situation, discussing how to discuss 
emotions is a critical first step. Care should be taken 
not to unduly categorize reactions as pathologic during and after a crisis event. However, it is important 
to remain vigilant about early identification of a 
maladaptive stress response such as suicidal ideation 
or dissociation.
FAMILY READINESS—THE ROLE OF THE MILI426
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TARY MEDICAL OFFICER
As described above, supporting military family 
readiness is a team endeavor. This team includes the 
family, members of the active duty member’s command, and members of the healthcare team, among 
others. Military medical officers can best help by (a) 
directly supporting military families, (b) coordinating the care delivered when needed, (c) staying up to 
date regarding evolving professional recommendations, and (d) educating the command about helpful 
resources for preventive and reactive strategies. 
Direct Support for Military Families
Direct support for military families includes much 
more than ensuring that the military member has 
been medically evaluated and is fit for duty. It also 
includes ensuring that the family’s medical needs are 
addressed and that they understand their care plan. 
In some situations, the medical officer will be able to 
care for the family, but in others, they may need to 
be seen by another provider. Playing an active role 
in ensuring that family members get the care they 
need is important. Navigating the healthcare system 
can be challenging, especially for individuals with 
limited experience accessing healthcare. Checking in 
to ensure that the families receive excellent care reassures military members and their families that their 
well-being is important. This is likely to contribute to 
family readiness. One simple strategy is to schedule 
“walk around” time to check in with the members of 
the unit. During that time, asking specific questions 
about families’ needs from the healthcare team is 
recommended. If concerns are mentioned, healthcare 
providers should investigate the concerns, act when 
possible, and reach back within 48 hours to provide 
information or plans of action.
Coordinating Care 
As noted above, healthcare providers may not be 
able to provide all the care required by service members or members of their family. In these situations, the 
most important first step is to listen. Play close attention to concerns and what has been done to seek help 
to date. Once it is determined that the healthcare needs 
exceed the provider’s capability to provide direct care, 
a plan of action and timeline should be discussed so 
the service member and their family members know 
what to expect. 
The next step will be to engage colleagues to coordinate the care military families need. Excellence in coordinating care depends on relationships—both with 
the patient and with members of the healthcare team 
who are in a position to help. To this end, developing relationships with key members of the healthcare 
team, in advance of crises, is essential. Members of the 
healthcare team who often play a key role in helping 
facilitate care include the following:
 
• social workers,
 
• primary care providers and nurses,
 
• mental health providers and nurses,
 
• chaplains, and
 
• referral managers. 
Educating Military Unit Leadership
Informing command leadership about the importance of family readiness, how it contributes to mission readiness at the individual and unit levels, and 
educating them about strategies known to be effective 
in preventing and managing crises are some of the 
most important military healthcare provider tasks. 
When possible, initiate these conversations early in the 
military assignment and at times when the command 
leadership has the time to listen. Providing specific 
personal examples in which preventive strategies to 
help enhance family resilience and readiness had an 
impact on command readiness can be a particularly 
poignant way to convey the point. 
FAMILY READINESS RESOURCES
Many resources are available to military families 
and the military healthcare providers who support 
them. Because family readiness is not a one-sizefits-all endeavor, it may take some effort to find the 
most effective resources and techniques to enhance 
readiness for each family. See Table 29-1 for representative resources designed to strengthen military 
family readiness.
SUMMARY
Family readiness in the context of a military community is influenced by each family’s unique makeup and 
situation, but there are many common stressors faced 
by military families that could affect their readiness. 
427
Family Readiness
Both preventive and reactive strategies help support 
the families’ readiness, and in turn, their units. Just 
as not all strategies will work for every individual, 
neither will all approaches work for every command. 
Understanding a variety of strategies, being comfortable with identifying alternative strategies if one is 
not effective, and maintaining willingness to work 
collaboratively with patients to find (through shared 
decision-making) the best solution will improve and 
reinforce military family readiness. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Abbott RK. The Changing Definition of “Family.” Compensation & Benefits Report. 2002;16(6):3–4.
 
2. Clever M, Segal DR. The demographics of military children and families. Future Child. 2013;23(2):13–39.
 
3. Bowles SV, Pollock LD, Moore M, et al. Total force fitness: the military family fitness model. Mil Med. 2015;180(3):246–258.
 
4. U.S. Department of Defense. Military Family Readiness (DoD Instruction 1342. 22). Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Defense. July 3, 2012. Updated April 11, 2017.
 
5. Luthar SS, Cicchetti D, Becker B. The construct of resilience: a critical evaluation and guidelines for future work. Child 
Dev. 2000;71(3):543–562.
 
6. Anthony EJ. Risk, vulnerability, and resilience: an overview. In: Anthony EJ, Cohler J, eds. The Guilford Psychiatry 
Series. The Invulnerable Child. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 1987: 3–48.
 
7. Patterson JM. Understanding family resilience. J Clin Psychol. 2002;58(3):233–246.
 
8. Holmes TH, Rahe RH. The social readjustment rating scale. J Psychosom Res. 1967;11(2):213–218.
 
9. Coddington RD. The significance of life events as etiologic factors in the diseases of children. J Psychosom Res. 1972;16:718.
 10. Comptroller General of the United States. Longer Time Between Moves Related to Higher Satisfaction and Retention. Washington, DC: US General Accounting Office; 2001. Report to Congress. GAO-01-841 Military Personnel.
 11. Asbury ET, Martin D. Military deployment and the spouse left behind. Fam J. 2012;20(1):45–50.
 12. Drummet AR, Coleman M, Cable S. Military families under stress: implications for family life education. Fam Relations. 
2003;52(3):279–287.
 13. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: classic definitions and new directions. Contemp Educ Psychol. 
2000;25(1):54–67.
 14. Deployment. Military One Source Web site. http://www.militaryonesource.mil/deployment. Accessed May 22, 2018.
 15. Hix WM, Shukiar HJ, Hanley JM, et al. Personnel Turbulence: The Policy Determinants of Permanent Change of Station 
Moves. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 1998.
 16. US Department of Commerce, Economic and Statistics Administration. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012. 
131st ed. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau; 2013.
 17. Ruff SB, Keim MA. Revolving doors: the impact of multiple school transitions on military children. Prof Couns. 
2014;4(2):103–113.
 18. Anderson JR. ABCs of home schooling. Why more military families are skipping school in favor of this sweeping 
trend. Military Times. March 14, 2013. 
 19. Bowen GL. Family Adaptation to Relocation: An Empirical Analysis of Family Stressors, Adaptive Resources, and Sense of 
Coherence. Alexandria, VA: US Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences; 1989. ARI Technical 
Report 856.
428
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 20. Matthiesen JK, Tissington PA. The four-factor taxonomy of relocation outcomes. Hum Resource Dev Rev. 2008 7(2):142–
164.
 21. Amato PR, Booth A. Changes in gender role attitudes and perceived marital quality. Am Sociol Rev. 1995;60(1):58–66.
 22. Center, Defense Manpower Data. 2015 Demographics: Profile of the Military Community. Washington, DC: Office of the 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Community and Family Policy; 2015.
 23. Carr C, Orthner DK, Brown III RJ. Living and family patterns in the Air Force. Air Univ Rev. 1980;31(2):75–96.
 24. Maury R, Stone B. Military Spouse Employment Report. Institute for Veterans and Military Families; 2014.
 25. Cooke TJ, Speirs K. Migration and employment among the civilian spouses of military personnel. Soc Sci Q. 2005;86:343–
355.
 26. Harrell MC, Lim N, Castaneda LW, Golinelli D. Working Around the Military: Challenges to Military Spouse Employment 
and Education. Santa Monica, CA: RAND National Defense Research Institute; 2004.
 27. Castaneda LW, Harrell MC, Varda DM, Hall KC, Beckett MK, Stern S. Deployment Experiences of Guard and Reserve 
Families: Implications for Support and Retention. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2008. 
 28. Pascarella ET, Terenzini PT. How College Affects Students: Findings and Insights from Twenty Years of Research. Vol 2. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2005.
 29. Goldsmith AH, Veum JR, Darity W. Unemployment, joblessness, psychological well-being and self-esteem: theory 
and evidence. J Socio Econ. 1997;26(2):133-158.
 30. Bunch SG, Eastman BJ, Moore RR. A profile of grandparents raising grandchildren as a result of parental military 
deployment. J Hum Behav Soc Environ. 2007;15(4):1–12.
 31. Vuga J, Juvan J. Work–family conflict between two greedy institutions—the family and the military. Curr Sociol. 
2013;61(7):1058–1077. 
 32. Kimmel J. Child care costs as a barrier to employment for single and married mothers. Rev Econ Stat. 1998;80(2):287–299.
 33. Kelley ML, Doane AN, Pearson MR. Single Military mothers in the new millennium: stresses, supports, and effects of 
deployment. In: Wadsworth SM, ed. Risk and Resilience in U.S. Military Families. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag New 
York; 2011:343-363.
 34. Kelley ML. Single military parents in the new millennium. In: Castro CA, Adler AB, Britt TW, eds. Military Life: The 
Psychology of Serving in Peace and Combat. Westport, CT: Praeger Security International; 2006: 93–103.
 35. Barker LH, Berry KD. Developmental issues impacting military families with young children during single and multiple deployments. Mil Med. 2009;174(10):1033–1040.
 36. Cederbaum JA, Gilreath TD, Benbenishty R, et al. Well-being and suicidal ideation of secondary school students from 
military families. J Adolesc Health. 2014;54(6):672–677.
 37. Milburn NG, Lightfoot M. Adolescents in wartime US military families: a developmental perspective on challenges 
and resources. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2013;16(3):266–277.
 38. Millegan J, McLay R, Engel C. The effect of geographic moves on mental healthcare utilization in children. J Adolesc 
Health. 2014;55(2):276–280.
 39. Exceptional family member program. US Army Medical Department Web site. http://efmp.amedd.army.mil. Updated 
September 9, 2015. Accessed May 5, 2018.
429
Family Readiness
 40. Russo TJ, Fallon MA. Helping military families who have a child with disability cope with stress. Early Child Educ J. 
2001;29(1):3–8.
 41. Saperstein AK, Lilje T, Seibert D. A model for teaching reflective practice. Mil Med. 2015;180(4 Suppl):142–146.
 42. Nguyen DR, Ee J, Berry-Caban CS, Hoedebecke K. The effects of military deployment on early child development. 
US Army Med Dep J. Oct-Dec 2014:81–86.
 43. Hoge EA, Guidos BM, Mete M, et al. Effects of mindfulness meditation on occupational functioning and health care 
utilization in individuals with anxiety. J Psychosom Res. 2017;95:7–11.
 44. Phillips KM, Antoni MH, Lechner SC, et al. Stress management intervention reduces serum cortisol and increases 
relaxation during treatment for nonmetastatic breast cancer. Psychosom Med. 2008;70(9):1044–1049.
 45. Network NCTS. Psychological First Aid Field Operations Guide, 2nd Edition. Washington, DC: National Center for PTSD; 
2006.
430
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
