363
Psychological Well-Being
Chapter 25
PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
ANGELA M. YARNELL, PhD*; ERIN S. BARRY, MS†; and NEIL E. GRUNBERG, PhD‡
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
Well-Being
Psychological Fitness
Psychological Well-Being
FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
Behaviors Relevant to Psychological Well-Being
Cognitive Processes Relevant to Psychological Well-Being 
Emotional Factors Relevant to Psychological Well-Being
MILITARY LIFE AND PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
Psychological Well-Being and the Service Member
Psychological Well-Being and the Military Family 
KEY INDICATORS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
Positive Affect
Mindfulness
Meaning and Purpose
Social Support
Unit Cohesion
Core Values
PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Role of the Military Medical Officer
Guidance to the Commander
PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING RESOURCES 
SUMMARY
*Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Research Psychologist, Behavioral Biology Branch, Center for Military Psychiatry Neuroscience Research, 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland
†Research Assistant Professor, Department of Military & Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
‡Professor, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
364
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The part can never be well unless the whole is well. 
—Plato (circa 425–347 bce)
The highest achievement by humans is happiness. 
—Aristotle (circa 384–322 bce)
The philosophies of Plato and Aristotle are relevant 
today for understanding the concept of psychological 
well-being. Plato expressed the idea that a human is 
made up of parts that contribute to a physical, psychological, and spiritual whole and that all parts that 
constitute the whole must be healthy for the being to be 
well. Aristotle built upon his mentor’s philosophy by 
adding that the ultimate goal of humans is happiness. 
He characterized this state as an achievement because 
it requires effort.
Military service members, their families, and civilians may strive to achieve or maintain psychological 
well-being. However, the life of a military service 
member involves challenges and situations that 
differ from civilian life. The US military has been 
an all-volunteer force since 1973, and people who 
decide to serve are willingly signing up for a lifestyle 
that includes occupational stress; the possibility of 
dangerous, life-threatening encounters; and separations (sometimes frequent) from significant others. 
These lifestyle requirements may make the people 
who choose military service different from people 
who do not. Research findings aid understanding and 
improvement of the lives of service members and their 
families in all areas, including that of psychological 
well-being. 
Military medical officers (MMOs) play an important role in identifying individual, family, and unit 
opportunities to sustain or improve psychological 
well-being among those they serve. In addition to 
caring for patients, MMOs must advise commanders 
and maintain and practice self-care. 
DEFINITIONS
Well-Being 
A state of health and wellness, the ability to judge 
life positively,1–3 and to achieve a balance between 
positive and negative affect. 4 In general terms, wellbeing refers to physical, emotional and psychological 
conditions. 
Psychological Fitness 
Psychological fitness is one of eight components of 
Total Force Fitness,5 and includes internal resources, 
external resources, and operational outcomes. Internal 
resources are present to some degree within every individual. They include awareness, levels of optimism, 
coping, decision-making, engagement, and active 
disengagement. External resources are not intrinsic 
to an individual; they originate from the environment and include training, leadership, and various 
fitness and wellness programs. Operational outcomes 
represent the consequences of applying internal and 
external resources to a circumstance. These outcomes 
include quality of life, mental health, sleep, drug use, 
and suicide. For example, an individual who is psychologically fit may have excellent coping skills and 
seek out wellness programs to deal with challenging 
situations, avoid risky behaviors, and enhance quality of life. Psychological fitness has been identified as 
a positive and valued state that should be achieved to 
help optimize human performance. Utilization of the 
three components described above help individuals 
reach that goal. 
Psychological Well-Being 
Integrated concepts of well-being and psychological fitness are crucial to understanding psychological 
well-being (PWB). PWB includes the following six 
components of positive psychological functioning6,7: 
 
1. Positive evaluations of oneself and one’s past 
life (self-acceptance).
 
2. A sense of continued growth and development as a person (personal growth).
 
3. The belief that one’s life is purposeful and 
meaningful (purpose in life).
 
4. The possession of quality relations with others (positive relations with others). 
 
5. The capacity to manage effectively one’s 
life and surrounding world (environmental 
mastery).
 
6. A sense of self-determination (autonomy). 
Approaching and achieving these components of 
psychological fitness help achieve the goal or state 
of PWB. 
365
Psychological Well-Being
FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
PWB is an important component of human performance optimization. It can be discussed independently, but it impacts and integrates with states of social 
and physical well-being. For example, poor PWB may 
lead to diminished social and physical well-being. 8 
All conditions of well-being are needed for human 
balance and health.
Positive PWB is associated with biological correlates 
that protect health,9 and the development of PWB for 
physicians can help them adapt to demands of the 
medical profession. 10 A good understanding of PWB can 
help the MMO to (1) optimally care for patients (service 
members and families); (2) appropriately advise commanders with regard to how PWB of service members 
and families impacts readiness and performance of 
service members; and (3) maintain and practice self-care. 
Behaviors Relevant to Psychological Well-Being
To understand PWB and how to achieve or help others to achieve it first requires consideration of behaviors, cognitions, and motivations, as well as spiritual 
factors, that contribute to PWB. These factors must be 
integrated for each individual seeking to achieve PWB. 
Behaviors that affect PWB include exercise, leisure 
activities, eating, sleep, drug use, and sexual behavior. 
These behaviors may have a positive or negative effect.
Exercise 
Individuals who exercise are more satisfied with 
their lives and happier than individuals who do not 
exercise. 11 Specifically, individuals who exercised two 
to three times per week are less depressed, angry, and 
stressed; are more trusting; and perceived their health 
to be better compared to people who do not exercise 
much. 12 Exercise is important for everyone, but may 
be especially beneficial for people with physical health 
(eg, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, arthritis, and sexual dysfunction) and psychological problems (eg, major 
depression13); pregnant women14; and teenagers. 15
Leisure activities also enhance PWB. 16 Activities 
like tai chi17; yoga18; and group activities19 improve 
PWB by reducing stress and anxiety, improving mood, 
increasing self-esteem, and reducing social isolation. 
Satisfaction with leisure activities clearly correlates 
with benefits to PWB. 20 
Eating 
Proper nutrition (eg, eating fruits, vegetables, lean 
meat, fish, and whole grains) is linked to positive 
PWB21,22 and fewer depressive symptoms,23 whereas 
a diet of processed or fried foods, refined grains, 
sugary products, and beer is associated with poorer 
outcomes. 21 Comfort foods—typically, foods high in 
sugar and carbohydrates—can enhance PWB acutely. 
Eating ice cream, for example, is associated with increased positive affect. 24 However, too much intake of 
these kinds of foods can lead to excessive weight gain 
that may decrease PWB over time.
Food deprivation generally decreases PWB and is 
related to psychological distress. 25 The term “hangry” 
has been coined to describe situations in which a person is angry as a result of hunger. Although this word 
may be amusing, it is a fairly common phenomenon 
and is possibly related to decreases in self-control as 
a result of hypoglycemia. Low glucose in the prefrontal cortex, the area of the brain responsible for selfcontrol, may be related to increases in aggression and 
violence. 26 When the prefrontal cortex is deprived of 
energy, such as in the case of hypoglycemia from not 
eating, an individual may experience reductions in 
self-control. Being hangry is an interesting emotional 
manifestation of a state of physiological need that is 
important to consider in terms of well-being. 
Sleep 
People spend more than a quarter of their lives 
sleeping, and quality sleep affects performance and 
PWB. 27 Most healthy adults need 7 to 9 hours of sleep 
each night. 28 However, most individuals, including 
military personnel, do not get enough sleep (or enough 
quality sleep). Lack of sleep negatively affects PWB. 
Chronic insufficient sleep is related to increased experience of pain (eg, body pain, back pain, and stomach 
pain) as well as compromised optimistic outlook and 
social functioning (eg, rating on friendliness, efficiency, 
and sociability). 29 Getting 8 hours of sleep increases 
optimistic outlook and social functioning. 29
Drug Use 
Drug use can affect PWB, whether legal (eg, alcohol, 
nicotine, caffeine, or drugs prescribed to the user) or 
illegal (eg, street drugs such as opiates, prescription 
drug abuse, or inappropriate use of performance enhancing drugs). Licit drugs are used by many people 
to enhance PWB and to attenuate stress. 30 However, it 
is important to understand the health risks of repeated 
drug use, including physical health dangers and decreases in PWB when drug dependence develops and 
during abstinence from addictive drugs (both licit 
366
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
and illicit). 30 Illicit drugs also are sometimes used to 
enhance PWB acutely, but long-term effects usually 
lead to decreases in PWB for psychobiological, social, 
and legal reasons. MMOs must be aware of the effects 
drug use has on PWB and educate commanders and 
patients about these potential dangers. 
Sexual Behavior 
Being sexually active is linked to better physical 
health and likely to PWB. Lack of a healthy sexual relationship or being in an unhealthy sexual relationship 
is associated with poor PWB. For example, in women, 
self-reported sexual dissatisfaction is correlated with 
lower PWB. 31 Further, unwanted sexual behaviors 
(ranging from verbal comments, nonverbal communication, or uninvited touching to sexual assault) 
have powerful and lasting negative effects on PWB. 
Of particular relevance to the military community, 
it has been reported that women who deployed to a 
combat zone were more likely to have experienced 
sexual stressors than female service members who 
did not deploy. 32 In addition, sexual abuse has been 
associated with decreased PWB (eg, depression and 
poor body image). 33
Cognitive Processes Relevant to Psychological 
Well-Being 
Cognitive processes include attention, awareness 
or perception, thoughts, and beliefs. Cognitions both 
affect and reflect PWB. 
Awareness 
Awareness is an aspect of consciousness that entails 
a perception of one’s environment. The manipulation 
of awareness (eg, mindfulness) affects well-being. For 
example, individuals who are able to balance work 
and life demands, and completely detach from work 
during off hours, are more satisfied with their lives, 
have less stress, and fully engage while at work. 34 
Mindfulness, used by marines and soldiers, is associated with decreases in perceived stress35 and increased 
performance. 36
Beliefs and Appraisals 
The experience of stress or negative emotions 
depends on a person’s beliefs or attitudes about 
the situation or the way in which he or she assesses 
or appraises the situation. For example, having an 
optimistic outlook can lead to better PWB. The term 
optimism is used to describe the extent to which 
people hold generally favorable expectancies for their 
future. 37 Optimism is related to increases in PWB,38 
while pessimism (belief that bad things will happen 
in the future39) decreases PWB. Specifically, optimism 
is related to indicators of better psychological and 
physical health; responses to adversity; emotional 
well-being; and relationships. 37 In contrast, pessimism 
is related to less life satisfaction40 and more depressive 
symptoms. 40,41 The ability to generate vivid mental 
imagery of positive future events, instead of focusing 
on negative thoughts or “thinking traps” (eg, catastrophizing), results in better PWB. 42 
Religiosity and spirituality are also related to 
PWB. 43–46 In particular, spiritual fitness enhances 
resilience, health, and well-being. 47 Spiritual fitness 
refers to domains related to the human spirit (eg, values, feelings, aspirations) encompassed by spiritual 
beliefs and practices, but is not specific to a particular 
religion or faith. 48 
Resilience 
The American Psychological Association defines 
psychological resilience as “the process of adapting 
well in the face of adversity, trauma, tragedy, threats 
or significant sources of stress.”49 Resilience factors 
represent individual or group-level variables that 
contribute to a decrease in the negative reactions to 
stressors. 50,51 Individual resilience factors include effective behavioral and cognitive coping skills. Group 
resilience factors may relate to effective leadership 
or support from the unit. An interesting analysis of 
survey data collected from deployed service members (Mental Health Advisory Team [MHAT-VI]) 
indicated that although soldiers reported similar 
rates of combat exposure, there was little similarity 
in scores on a measure of PTSD symptoms. 52 This 
analysis highlights the marked variability in response 
to stressor exposure experienced by individual service members and suggests differential effects of 
resilience factors.
Resilience and resilience training are receiving 
substantial attention in the military to help service 
members prevent and recover from physical and 
psychological stressors. It is noteworthy that “thriving” (to grow and develop subsequent to stress such 
that the individual becomes stronger53) is an ideal that 
maximizes PWB. The MMO plays a key role in translating the science behind resilience into practical and 
applicable tools that unit commanders and individuals can use to enhance their ability to deal with stress, 
thereby enhancing PWB. 
367
Psychological Well-Being
Emotional Factors Relevant to Psychological WellBeing
Positive emotions enhance and reflect PWB, 
whereas negative emotions are inversely related to 
PWB. Individuals who are skilled at recognizing and 
regulating their own emotions and the emotions of others are said to be high in emotional intelligence. High 
emotional intelligence is related to increased PWB. 54 
Emotional arousal (or stress) is related to performance and psychological state following the classic 
Yerkes-Dodson inverted U-shaped function (Figure 
25-1). Some individuals seem to thrive under extreme 
stress (eg, Navy SEALS and other special operations 
forces), and the point at which the effects of stress go 
from positive to negative differs from person to person. Many factors seem to affect this point, including 
genetics, prenatal environment, childhood stress, personality, resilience, and other factors. The relationship 
between PWB and particular levels of arousal or stress, 
therefore, depend on the individual and on situations.
Medical professionals experience job stress and 
burnout. These demands are negatively related to 
PWB. Further, individuals who lack social support 
from supervisors and coworkers display worse PWB 
and more unfavorable work outcomes. 55 
Low
Medium
High
Figure 25-1. Depiction of the Yerkes-Dodson Law of Optimal 
Arousal. As one’s arousal or stress level increases, so does 
performance and hedonic (or emotional) state; however, 
when stress is high and exceeds one’s coping ability, performance and hedonic state decrease. 
Data source: Yerkes RM, Dodson JD. The relation of strength 
of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. J Comp Neurol 
Psychol. 1908:459–482. 
Adapted from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
File:OriginalYerkesDodson.svg.
MILITARY LIFE AND PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
Military service affects the PWB of service members 
and their families. It ultimately affects units and the 
military community, readiness, training, and even the 
achievement of military missions. 
Psychological Well-Being and the Service Member
Military researchers have investigated the psychological effects of war for decades. Modern conflicts 
with increased survivability have shed new light on the 
relationship between stressful and traumatic encounters and individual health and performance. There 
is now a greater appreciation for this relationship, 
and increased attention is paid to the role of mental 
or behavioral health in readiness to fight and fitness 
for duty. Greater emphasis is now placed on holistic 
health, patient-centered care, individualized medicine, 
and reduced stigma. The services now recognize that 
military life affects PWB in service members and their 
families and that this impact is present in home, garrison, deployed, and combat situations. 
Despite the stressful and often dangerous nature of 
military service, active duty military members are more 
likely to psychologically thrive than civilians. This thriving may occur because of beneficial resources associated 
with military service, including job security and financial 
compensation. 56 For instance, a majority of Army officers 
(70%) report satisfaction with pay. 57 Although many 
junior soldiers (about 30%) report financial hardship,58 
it is not clear if these concerns predated enlistment (eg, 
existing debt) or developed during military service. Free 
financial counseling and educational services are offered 
by the military and may help soldiers improve their financial situations and reduce stress. Other advantageous 
resources available to service members include tuition 
assistance, tax-free housing, subsidized childcare, free 
medical care, special pay, and bonuses (for retention of 
soldiers with specific skills). 
The military culture also offers social benefits that 
contribute to PWB. Social support and unit cohesion 
are both important determinants of PWB for service 
members. In addition, high levels of perceived support from the community, unit leadership, and base 
agencies reduced service members’ concerns about 
their spouses’ ability to cope with deployment-related 
stressors. 59 This perception of support for the nondeployed spouse mitigates one potential stressor on the 
deployed service member.
368
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Leadership 
Another key variable for PWB in the military, given 
its hierarchal structure, is leadership. Quality of life 
in the military is highly dependent on leadership. 57 
Survey data collected from deployed service members 
indicate that strong leadership was significantly correlated with improved morale and cohesion, fewer 
mental health problems, and fewer ethical violations. 60 
Similar surveys of comparisons across 28 platoons 
revealed that leaders who exhibit positive behaviors 
such as clear thinking, while not displaying negative 
behaviors such as showing favoritism, helped to reduce effects of combat exposures. 61 
Combat Stress 
Despite the benefits of military service, there are 
obvious risks and potentials for poor outcomes with 
regard to PWB. To a certain extent some reactions to 
deployment-related stressors are expected. The Department of the Army coined the term “combat stress 
reactions” to describe the physical, emotional, cognitive, and behavioral reactions to these stressors and 
has defined it as “expected, predictable, emotional, 
intellectual, physical, and/or behavioral reactions of 
a Soldier who has been exposed to stressful events in 
combat.”62 This definition normalizes the reaction to 
combat-related stressors and also provides a framework to identify and assess maladaptive responses, 
with the intention of early intervention. Of these 
various reactions, service members are most likely to 
report physical symptoms to their medical provider. 
These reactions represent physiological responses 
and arousal to combat stressors. Muscle tension, sleep 
disturbances, and headaches are physical symptoms 
that may be reported by service members experiencing combat stress. It is imperative that medical 
providers understand how reactions to combat stress 
can manifest physically and how they may present 
in patients. 
Injury 
These stressful or traumatic exposures can have 
deleterious effects on PWB. In the last decade extensive 
research has been done on the effects of combat on 
mental health, indicating increased rates of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, anxiety, substance abuse, and other functional impairments. 51,63,64 
Some believe that combat-related PTSD may be an 
occupational hazard of military service. 65 Aside from 
the psychological effects of stress exposures resulting 
from combat, service members suffer from physical 
injuries as well. Injured veterans are more likely to 
suffer from PTSD and mood-related disorders than 
noninjured veterans. 66 The relationship between physical injury and negative psychological effects may be (a) 
direct—physical injury may cause biological changes 
that affect psychological state; (b) indirect—physical 
injury may disrupt behaviors in ways that are psychologically upsetting; or (c) by other means such as 
disrupting sleep, which can inhibit both physical and 
psychological recovery. 
Transitions 
Experiences during deployment have a great effect 
on how a service member transitions back into the 
garrison environment. In their model of deploymentto-home transition, Adler and colleagues describe the 
following factors67: 
 
• deployment variables (experiences, anticipation of homecoming, meaningfulness); 
 
• postdeployment variables (physical, emotional, cognitive, and social); 
 
• quality of life (health, work, relationships); 
and 
 
• other reintegration moderators like decompression, developing a narrative, unit variables, and anticipation of deploying again. 
Deriving meaning from work while deployed and 
in garrison is particularly important for PWB. Finding 
meaning in work is associated with enhanced motivation and well-being. 68 If service members find their 
work while deployed to be meaningless, they may 
experience anger and resentment, leading to negative 
impacts on PWB. There may be less meaning associated with work upon return from deployment as well, 
for various reasons including a decrease in arousal 
associated with work in the postdeployment environment. Decreases in arousal postdeployment can lead 
to increased risk-taking behavior. This behavior may 
include unsafe driving, leading to more road accidents 
and even increased death rates due to accidents in 
the year following deployment. 69 Transition home 
can be difficult for all service members, regardless of 
their combat experience or mental health status, and 
should be appropriately planned, monitored, and assessed. Military medical providers play a key role in 
this entire process. 
Psychological Well-Being and the Military Family 
The transition to life at home for service members 
with families can also have a great impact on family 
relationships and on the PWB of family members. Military life has substantial impact on service members’ 
369
Psychological Well-Being
spouses and families. Family members experience 
various stressors such as relocation, social isolation, 
separation, and fear of or actual injury or death of 
the service member. The stressors may positively or 
negatively impact the PWB of the family member, 
depending on a number of variables. The wars in Iraq 
and Afghanistan have brought the longest family 
separations since World War II. 70 More than half of all 
combat deployments left at least one dependent family member behind. 58 These separations are difficult 
for service members and their families, and family 
stability is negatively affected by prolonged separation 
because of deployment. 71 
Spouse Well-Being 
For female spouses, the length of separation is 
significantly associated with poor well-being. 72 More 
specifically, deployment has been related to decreases 
in health-promoting behaviors including exercise, 
social interaction, rest, safety-related behaviors,73 and 
greater perceived stress74 for the nondeployed spouses. 
Further, nondeployed spouses often have psychopathological problems including major depression or 
generalized anxiety disorder; emotional, alcohol, or 
related family problems; and functional impairment in 
work and life,75 sleep disorders, acute stress reactions, 
and adjustment disorders. 76 
Care for Wounded Warriors
In addition to the effects of family separation, the demands associated with current wars include increased 
survival but greater care requirements for wounded 
warriors. 57 Specifically, PTSD can be a secondary 
traumatic stressor for family members. In one study, 
PTSD symptoms reported by military members predicted increased symptoms in their female spouses. 77 
The MMO can impact these associations by including 
family members in the treatment services for PTSD and 
educating the family about combat-related reactions. 60 
These steps may help improve treatment outcomes for 
the service member and lessen the impact of mental 
health problems on the family. Education for family 
members about physical injuries (eg, traumatic brain 
injury and limb amputation) is important so they 
understand the symptoms associated with these injuries (eg, fatigue, memory loss, frustration, and angry 
outbursts) and do not blame the service member. 78 
Relationship Quality 
Given that deployment has clearly identified effects 
on service members and their significant others’ wellbeing, it is no surprise that there are further impacts 
on intimate relationships and satisfaction. Marital 
relationships are affected by military service,79 specifically in the following ways: 
 
• disproportionate work–family balance80; 
 
• preparing for or recent return from deployment81; 
 
• difficulty communicating, reestablishing 
emotional bonds, or renegotiating roles and 
responsibilities82; and 
 
• physical or mental health concerns for one or 
both partners. 57,83,84 
Marital satisfaction is negatively correlated with 
PTSD and depression, although it is not significantly 
related to combat exposure by itself, suggesting that 
other factors are involved. 85 MMOs should be aware 
of these strains on marriage and relationships unique 
to military service and incorporate them into their 
practice and interactions with patients and families. 
Coping 
In addition to the perception of stress, coping style 
is predictive of PWB in female military spouses of 
deployed service members, and style of coping varies based on rank of spouse, whether she grew up 
in a military family, and experience of a previous 
deployment separation. 73 The ability of the spouse or 
family member to cope with the stress of military life 
and deployment is important. In a study of spouses 
from an Army infantry division, problem-focused 
coping strategies were more frequently endorsed 
than emotion-focused coping strategies. Problemfocused coping refers to changing or modifying 
the fundamental cause of stress, whereas emotionfocused coping refers to strategies that are effective 
in the management of unchangeable stressors. 86–88 
Problem-focused coping was related to fewer depression symptoms, especially in instances where the 
individual perceived little control over the situation. 89 
In addition, access to social networks and sources of 
social support—similar to the situation for service 
members—is critical for families. Support from community and unit positively correlated with families’ 
ability to adapt to stress. 90 Spouses who did not meet 
criteria for major depressive disorder or PTSD were 
more likely to report positive effects from deployment 
(more independence, more self-confident problem 
solving) than spouses who met criteria for major 
depressive disorder or PTSD. 82 
Although separations because of military service are 
stressful and are associated with adverse psychological 
health outcomes, these separations are quite different 
from separations during past wars because of current 
370
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
technology (email, phone, video call) that increase opportunities for communication and connectedness. Also, 
Internet and virtual communities may increase connectedness of family members to available sources of support. 70 
Employment 
Military spouses’ employment is another important 
factor that affects PWB of military family members. 
Working contributes to the overall satisfaction of military spouses, providing additional compensation, personal fulfillment, independence, and other benefits. 91 
Unemployment can act as a chronic stressor92 and 
negatively affect PWB. 93 Education level of military 
spouses also may play a role in better PWB. 
Children 
Children of service members also are affected by 
military separations. Children in military families, 
unlike most civilian children, live with the concern 
that their parent may be injured or killed during a 
combat deployment,94 which may lead to emotional 
difficulties. 95 Length of the parent’s deployment and 
the parent’s rank (a variable that likely represents a 
complex set of family circumstances) are related to 
PWB. There is some evidence that child neglect and 
mistreatment increase for the children of enlisted 
service members during a combat deployment. 96 
Increases in interpersonal violence in general are associated with combat deployment97 and the length 
of deployment. 98 It is important for the MMO to be 
aware of these potential issues for family members, 
especially children. Additionally, the MMO can assist 
the unit command in preventing these poor outcomes 
associated with military service and deployment by 
educating them about the relationship between certain factors discussed here. For example, engaging 
in military-sponsored activities seems to enhance 
well-being. 99 
KEY INDICATORS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
Key concepts relevant to PWB include positive affect; mindfulness; purpose and meaning in life; social 
support; unit cohesion; and core values, which are the 
heart of military service. These factors may change 
over time and circumstances, so a clear understanding 
of them can be used by MMOs and the people they 
treat to optimize PWB.
Positive Affect
Positive affect describes how much an individual 
experiences positive moods such as joy, interest, and 
alertness. According to research, this concept appears 
to be more beneficial with respect to health and mortality relative to negative affect, in which individuals 
tend to experience negative emotions such as anxiety, 
sadness, fear, anger, guilt and shame, irritability, and 
other such feelings or states (eg, Cohen and Pressman100). Positive affect is directly associated with 
good sleep,27 serves a protective role in cardiovascular 
disease,101 facilitates healthy aging,102 and is proposed 
as a buffer for the impact of psychosocial risk factors.
Mindfulness
Mindfulness can be conceptualized as the act of 
intentionally being acutely aware of what is going on 
internally and externally, without reacting. 35,36,103,104 
Mindfulness and its underlying awareness are inherent personality traits as well as capabilities that can be 
honed through training. 103,104 Evidence for the benefits 
of mindfulness is extensive and instructive. 103 Importantly, mindfulness can be helpful for many operational, leadership, and personal activities and is likely 
beneficial for enhancing resilience and overall health. 103 
Many current military leaders use mindfulness as a 
tool to better prepare for a dynamic and uncertain 
future. Importantly, training in mindfulness has been 
shown to serve as a preventive measure against physician burnout. 104 It is an important concept that can and 
is impacting health and performance.
Meaning and Purpose
Meaning and purpose have been studied in the social sciences since the late 1980s. Meaning is described 
as “making sense, order, or coherence out of one’s 
existence” and purpose “refers to intention, some 
function to be fulfilled, or goals to be achieved.”105 
Most of the literature assesses meaning and purpose 
in pathological and psychopathological conditions, but 
in some instances meaning in life has been found to 
have a strong correlation with positive well-being. 106 
Social Support
Social support involves the perception and reality 
of assistance and understanding provided by other 
people; this support can buffer or reduce stress and 
effects of stress. 107 Social support can be structural 
(eg, available social ties like marital, family, or church 
affiliations)108 or functional (ie, not just available, but 
371
Psychological Well-Being
available and able to meet the person’s needs). In the 
military, positive unit environments facilitate social 
support and help individuals cope with stress. 57 Specifically, the relationships between work stress and morale, and work stress and depression, are moderated 
by the quality of the social environment. 109 Conversely, 
the absence of social support is a risk factor for physical 
and psychological problems. 110–113 
The deployed or combat environment may present 
conditions under which service members need the 
most social support because they are removed from 
their usual social support networks of family and 
friends while facing new stressors. As a result, social 
support from the unit and other available services (eg, 
buddies, effective leaders, behavioral health professionals, chaplains) is crucial in the deployed setting. 
Reliance on members of the unit is part of military culture and is key to successful integration into military 
life. An individual who successfully integrates into a 
group can achieve a sense of belonging and increased 
self-worth, which contributes to positive health outcomes,114 whereas one who does not integrate may 
experience negative health effects. 115 Social support 
buffers deleterious effects of stress on health. 107 Positive 
effects of social support can be reflected in neuroendocrine and immune response biomarkers,116,117 reduced 
psychological despair,118 and increased motivation 
toward self-care. 119 
Unit Cohesion
Unit cohesion is similar to social support, but with 
specific relevance for the military. It represents the 
degree to which individuals are bonded to one another and to their higher organization. Unit cohesion 
in the military is positively associated with readiness, 
performance of individuals and groups, and personal 
well-being. 120 Unit cohesion has been reported to moderate the relationship between combat exposure and 
posttraumatic stress in marines and Navy corpsmen. 121 
Belonging to a resilient group, with high morale, has 
a positive impact on the well-being of the service 
member. 114
Core Values
Core values are qualities representing an individual’s or organization’s deeply held beliefs and 
fundamental driving forces. They define what an organization believes and how it resonates and appeals 
to others within the organization and throughout the 
external world. Core values should be part of each 
military member’s belief system. Core values represent the solid core of each person, who they are, what 
they believe, and who they should want to be going 
forward. They provide guiding principles and can be 
used as a touchstone for service members. Each of 
the services has its own set of core values, as do most 
individuals. These core values are extremely important 
for PWB within, across, and throughout military communities (Exhibit 25-1).
EXHIBIT 25-1
SERVICE CORE VALUES
Service core values are shared fundamental beliefs that cross 
service boundaries, but the unique aspects of each service 
are reflected in the differences among their top priorities.
Army 
 
• Loyalty
 
• Duty
 
• Respect
 
• Selfless Service
 
• Honor
 
• Integrity
 
• Personal Courage
Air Force
 
• Integrity First
 
• Service Before Self
 
• Excellence in All We Do
Navy and Marine Corps
 
• Honor
 
• Courage
 
• Commitment
PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
Role of the Military Medical Officer
The MMO plays a key role in PWB education, training, and evaluation for service members and their 
families. The MMO is charged with explaining the role 
of behaviors, cognitions, and motivations with respect 
to PWB. The MMO should educate individual patients 
and unit commanders about factors that impact PWB. 
Enhancing PWB may be as simple as improving 
eating, sleeping, or exercising. Patients may also 
alter the way they think about an issue. This is a 
more difficult way to enhance PWB but MMOs can 
assist and provide guidance. Changing motivations 
is the most difficult way to enhance PWB. If the 
issues go beyond the MMO’s ability to treat (eg, 
psychopathology), the MMO must refer the patient 
372
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
to the next appropriate level of care. If psychological 
and behavioral healthcare can be found in the same 
place as the MMO is providing care, then it may 
be as easy as walking the patient down the hall. In 
other cases it may be more difficult for an MMO to 
easily transition the patient to psychological care. 
MMOs should be aware of the referral process and 
available resources at each facility in which care is 
provided. 
MMOs are also responsible for managing their 
own well-being, by monitoring and manipulating 
the factors discussed in this chapter. MMOs should 
be aware of the importance of self-care to maintain 
high levels of performance and to avoid physical or 
psychological burnout. A valuable complement to 
self-awareness is to rely on and encourage input from 
significant others and trusted colleagues with regard 
to the MMO’s PWB. Perhaps the most valuable guideline to optimize one’s own PWB is to remember the 
importance of balance in all aspects of professional 
and personal life. 
Guidance to the Commander 
The first step is to make the unit commander aware 
of potential threats to PWB and ways to improve PWB, 
and to educate the commander about how to make 
changes within the unit. Threats to PWB include the 
following:
 
• drug use,
 
• bias or prejudice,
 
• stress,
 
• injury, and
 
• transitions.
Framing the threats or challenges as detractors from 
accomplishing unit mission or decreasing readiness 
are often the most successful ways to effectively communicate the importance of PWB. 
MMOs should remind the commander that psychological fitness is a key component to overall fitness and readiness. Commanders can support PWB 
among soldiers in a unit by promoting or providing 
the following:
 
• physical exercise;
 
• healthy eating;
 
• sufficient sleep;
 
• mindfulness;
 
• optimism;
 
• spirituality;
 
• social support; 
 
• unit cohesion; and
 
• effective leadership.
It is recommended that MMOs educate unit commanders on specific threats and countermeasures to 
PWB. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING RESOURCES
Many tools and resources are available to MMOs, 
commanders, and soldiers and their families, ranging 
from online support to programs on base, such as:
 
• Adler AB, Bliese PD, Castro CAE, eds. Deployment Psychology: Evidence-Based Strategies to 
Promote Mental Health in the Military. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2011 (https://www.ajol.info/index.php/
smsajms/article/viewFile/97397/86707).
 
• Human Performance Resource Center (http://
hprc-online.org/about-us/about-hprc).
 
• Family and morale, welfare and recreation 
(MWR) programs on base.
 
• Community service programs on base.
 
• Defense Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury (http://
www.dcoe.mil/). 
 
• Center for Deployment Psychology (http://
deploymentpsych.org/).
SUMMARY
Healing is a matter of time but it is sometimes also a 
matter of opportunity.
—Hippocrates (460 bce–370 bce)
Psychological well-being is relevant to the lives of 
all people, but the challenges faced by service members and their families underscore the importance 
of maintaining and enhancing PWB. As discussed 
in this chapter, various behaviors, cognitions, and 
motivations/emotions affect and reflect PWB. But 
as Hippocrates, the “father of Western medicine,” 
wisely advised more than 2 millennia ago, we can 
wait to heal and hope to achieve well-being, or we 
can take advantage of opportunities to heal. PWB is 
especially affected by finding opportunities to take 
meaningful actions. The MMO serves a key role in 
this pursuit for service members, units, patients, 
and self. 
373
Psychological Well-Being
REFERENCES
 
1. Well-being concepts. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Web site. http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/wellbeing.htm. 
Updated May 31, 2016. Accessed December 7, 2017.
 
2. Diener E, Suh E, Oishi S. Recent findings on subjective well-being. Indian J Clin Psychol. 1997;24:25–41.
 
3. Veenhoven R. Sociological theories of subjective well-being. In: Eid M, Larsen RJ, eds. The Science of Subjective WellBeing. New York: Guilford Press; 2008: 44–61.
 
4. Bradburn NM. The Structure of Psychological Well-Being. Chicago, IL: Aldine; 1969.
 
5. Jonas WB, O’Connor FG, Deuster P, Peck J, Shake C, Frost SS. Why total force fitness? Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):6–13.
 
6. Ryff CD. Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning of psychological well-being. J Pers Soc Psychol. 
1989;57(6):1069.
 
7. Ryff CD, Keyes CLM. The structure of psychological well-being revisited. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1995;69(4):719.
 
8. Kaniasty K. Predicting social psychological well-being following trauma: the role of postdisaster social support. Psychol 
Trauma. 2012;4(1):22.
 
9. Steptoe A, Demakakos P, de Oliveira C, Wardle J. Distinctive biological correlates of positive psychological well-being 
in older men and women. Psychosom Med. 2012;74(5):501–508.
 10. Simon CR, Durand-Bush N. Does self-regulation capacity predict psychological well-being in physicians? Psychol 
Health Med. 2015;20(3):311–321.
 11. Stubbe JH, de Moor MH, Boomsma DI, de Geus EJ. The association between exercise participation and well-being: a 
co-twin study. Prev Med. 2007;44(2):148–152.
 12. Hassmen P, Koivula N, Uutela A. Physical exercise and psychological well-being: a population study in Finland. Prev 
Med. 2000;30(1):17–25.
 13. Penedo FJ, Dahn JR. Exercise and well-being: a review of mental and physical health benefits associated with physical 
activity. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2005;18(2):189–193.
 14. Da Costa D, Rippen N, Dritsa M, Ring A. Self-reported leisure-time physical activity during pregnancy and relationship to psychological well-being. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol. 2003;24(2):111–119.
 15. Motl RW, Birnbaum AS, Kubik MY, Dishman RK. Naturally occurring changes in physical activity are inversely related 
to depressive symptoms during early adolescence. Psychosom Med. 2004;66(3):336–342.
 16. Pressman SD, Matthews KA, Cohen S, et al. Association of enjoyable leisure activities with psychological and physical 
well-being. Psychosom Med. 2009;71(7):725–732.
 17. Wang C, Bannuru R, Ramel J, Kupelnick B, Scott T, Schmid CH. Tai Chi on psychological well-being: systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2010;10:23.
 18. West J, Otte C, Geher K, Johnson J, Mohr DC. Effects of hatha yoga and African dance on perceived stress, affect, and 
salivary cortisol. Ann Behav Med. 2004;28(2):114–118.
 19. Trainor S, Delfabbro P, Anderson S, Winefield A. Leisure activities and adolescent psychological well-being. J Adolesc. 
2010;33(1):173–186.
 20. Brown BA, Frankel BG, Fennell M. Happiness through leisure: the impact of type of leisure activity, age, gender and 
leisure satisfaction on psychological well-being. J Appl Recreation Res. 1991;16(4):368–392.
374
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 21. Jacka FN, Pasco JA, Mykletun A, et al. Association of western and traditional diets with depression and anxiety in 
women. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167(3):305–311.
 22. Blanchflower DG, Oswald AJ, Stewart-Brown S. Is psychological well-being linked to the consumption of fruit and 
vegetables? Soc Indic Res. 2013;114(3):785–801.
 23. Tsai AC, Chang TL, Chi SH. Frequent consumption of vegetables predicts lower risk of depression in older Taiwanese—results of a prospective population-based study. Public Health Nutr. 2012;15(6):1087–1092.
 24. Linley PA, Dovey H, de Bruin E, et al. Two simple, brief, naturalistic activities and their impact on positive affect: 
feeling grateful and eating ice cream. Psychol Well Being. 2013;3(1):1–14.
 25. Carter KN, Kruse K, Blakely T, Collings S. The association of food security with psychological distress in New Zealand 
and any gender differences. Soc Sci Med. 2011;72(9):1463–1471.
 26. DeWall CN, Deckman T, Gailliot MT, Bushman BJ. Sweetened blood cools hot tempers: physiological self-control and 
aggression. Aggress Behav. 2011;37(1):73–80.
 27. Steptoe A, O’Donnell K, Marmot M, Wardle J. Positive affect, psychological well-being, and good sleep. J Psychosom 
Res. 2008;64(4):409–415.
 28. Random facts about sleep. National Sleep Foundation Web site. 2015; http://sleepfoundation.org/sleep-news/25random-facts-about-sleep. Accessed December 8, 2017.
 29. Haack M, Mullington JM. Sustained sleep restriction reduces emotional and physical well-being. Pain. 2005;119(13):56–64.
 30. Grunberg NE, Berger SS, Hamilton KR. Stress and drug use. In: Contrada RJ, Baum A, eds. The Handbook of Stress 
Science: Biology, Psychology and Health. New York, NY: Springer; 2011: 287–300.
 31. Davison SL, Bell RJ, LaChina M, Holden SL, Davis SR. The Relationship between self-reported sexual satisfaction and 
general well-being in women. J Sex Med. 2009;6(10):2690–2697.
 32. Leardmann CA, Pietrucha A, Magruder KM, et al. Combat deployment is associated with sexual harassment or sexual 
assault in a large, female military cohort. Women’s Health Issues. 2013;23(4):e215–e223.
 33. Campbell JC, Soeken KL. Forced sex and intimate partner violence: effects on women’s risk and women’s health. 
Violence Against Women. 1999;5(9):1017–1035.
 34. Sonnentag S. Psychological detachment from work during leisure time: the benefits of mentally disengaging from 
work. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2012;21(2):114–118.
 35. Johnson DC, Thom NJ, Stanley EA, et al. Modifying resilience mechanisms in at-risk individuals: a controlled study 
of mindfulness training in Marines preparing for deployment. Am J Psychiatry. 2014;171(8):844–853.
 36. Jha AP, Morrison AB, Dainer-Best J, Parker S, Rostrup N, Stanley EA. Minds “at attention”: mindfulness training curbs 
attentional lapses in military cohorts. PLoS One. 2015;10(2):e0116889.
 37. Carver CS, Scheier MF, Segerstrom SC. Optimism. Clin Psychol Rev. 2010;30(7):879–889.
 38. Augusto-Landa JM, Pulido-Martos M, Lopez-Zafra E. Does perceived emotional intelligence and optimism/pessimism 
predict psychological well-being? J Happiness Stud. 2011;12(3):463–474.
 39. Pessimism. Merriam-Webster Web site. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/pessimism. Accessed December 
7, 2015.
 40. Chang EC, Maydeu-Olivares A, D’Zurilla TJ. Optimism and pessimism as partially independent constructs: relationship to positive and negative affectivity and psychological well-being. Pers Individ Dif. 1997;23(3):433–440.
375
Psychological Well-Being
 41. Chang EC, Sanna LJ, Yang K-M. Optimism, pessimism, affectivity, and psychological adjustment in US and Korea: A 
test of a mediation model. Pers Individ Dif. 2003;34(7):1195–1208.
 42. Blackwell SE, Rius-Ottenheim N, Schulte-van Maaren YW, et al. Optimism and mental imagery: a possible cognitive 
marker to promote well-being? Psychiatry Res. 2013;206(1):56–61.
 43. Ellison CG, Fan D. Daily spiritual experiences and psychological well-being among US adults. Soc Indic Res. 
2008;88(2):247–271.
 44. Patrick JH, Kinney JM. Why believe? The effects of religious beliefs on emotional well being. In: McFadden SH, Brennan M, Patrick JH, eds. New Directions in the Study of Late Life Religiousness and Spirituality. Binghamton, NY: Haworth 
Press; 2003: 153–170.
 45. Koenig HG. Aging and God: Spiritual Pathways to Mental Health in Midlife and Later Years. Binghamton, NY: Haworth 
Pastoral Press; 1994.
 46. Levin JS, Chatters LM. Research on religion and mental health: an overview of empirical findings and theoretical issues. In: Koenig HG, ed. Handbook of Religion and Mental Health. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1998: 33–50.
 47. Pargament KI, Sweeney PJ. Building spiritual fitness in the Army: an innovative approach to a vital aspect of human 
development. Am Psychol. 2011;66(1):58–64.
 48. Hufford DJ, Fritts MJ, Rhodes JE Spiritual fitness. Mil Med. 2010;175(8S):73–87.
 49. American Psychological Association. (2018) The Road to resilience. http://www.apa.org/helpcenter/road-resilience.
aspx. Accessed Jan 5, 2018.
 50. Bliese PD, Adler AB, Castro CAE. Research-based preventive mental health care strategies in the military. In: Adler 
AB, Bliese PD, Castro CAE, eds. Deployment Psychology: Evidence-Based Strategies to Promote Mental Health in the Military. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2011: 103–124.
 51. Vasterling JJ, Proctor SP, Amoroso P, Kane R, Heeren T, White RF. Neuropsychological outcomes of army personnel 
following deployment to the Iraq war. JAMA. 2006;296(5):519–529.
 52. Bliese PD. Social climates: drivers of soldier well-being and resilience. In: Adler AB, Castro CA, Britt TW, eds. Military 
Life: The Psychology of Serving in Peace and Combat. Vol 2 Operational Stress. Wesport, CT: Praeger; 2006:213–234.
 53. Thrive. Merriam-Webster Web site. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/thrive. Accessed December 8, 2017.
 54. Salami SO. Personality and psychological well-being of adolescents: the moderating role of emotional intelligence. 
Soc Behav Pers. 2011;39(6):785–794.
 55. Burke RJ, Moodie S, Dolan SL, Fiksenbaum L. Job demands, social support, work satisfaction and psychological wellbeing among nurses in Spain. In: Work Satisfaction and Psychological Well-Being Among Nurses in Spain. Barcelona, Spain: 
2012. ESADE Business School Research Paper 233.
 56. Witters D. Active duty military leads U.S. in well-being; veterans lag. Gallup News Web site. http://www.gallup.com/
poll/141089/Active-Duty-Military-Leads-Wellbeing-Veterans-Lag.aspx. Published June 30, 2010. Accessed December 
8, 2017.
 57. Ryan DM, Burrell LM. What they deserve: quality of life in the US military. In: Laurence JH, Matthews MD, eds. The 
Oxford Handbook of Military Psychology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2012: 381–399.
 58. Report of the 2nd quadrennial quality of life review. Military One Source Web site. http://download.militaryonesource.
mil/12038/MOS/Reports/Quadrennial%20Quality%20of%20Life%20Review%202009.pdf. Published January, 2009. 
Accessed December 8, 2017.
 59. Spera C. Spouses’ ability to cope with deployment and adjust to Air Force family demands: identification of risk and 
protective factors. Armed Forces Soc. 2009;35(2):286–306.
376
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 60. Hoge C. Public health strategies and treatment of service members and veterans with combat-related mental health 
problems. In: Adler AB, Bliese PD, Castro CA, eds. Deployment Psychology. Evidenced-Based Strategies to Promote Mental 
Health in the Military. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2011: 17–34.
 61. Bliese PD. Within-group agreement, nonindependence, and reliability: implications for data aggregation and analysis. 
In: Klein KJ, Kozlowski SW, eds. Multilevel Theory, Research, and Methods, in Organizations. San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass; 2000: 349–381.
 62. US Department of the Army. Combat and Operational Stress Control. Washington, DC: DA; 2006. Field Manual 4-02. 51.
 63. Hoge CW, Castro CA, Messer SC, McGurk D, Cotting DI, Koffman RL. Combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, mental 
health problems, and barriers to care. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(1):13–22.
 64. Joint Mental Health Advisory Team. Joint Mental Health Advisory Team 7 Operation Enduring Freedom 2010 Afghanistan. 
Fort Sam Houston, TX: Office of The Surgeon General, United States Army Medical Command; 2011.
 65. Castro CAE, Adler AB. Reconceptualizing combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder as an occupational hazard. 
In: Adler AB, Bliese PD, Castro CAE, eds. Deployment Psychology. Evidenced-Based Strategies to Promote Mental Health 
in the Military. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2012: 217–242.
 66. Koren D, Norman D, Cohen A, Berman J, Klein EM. Increased PTSD risk with combat-related injury: a matched comparison study of injured and uninjured soldiers experiencing the same combat events. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162(2):276–282.
 67. Adler JM, Hershfield HE. Mixed emotional experience is associated with and precedes improvements in psychological 
well-being. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35633.
 68. Britt TW, Dickinson JM, Moore D, Castro CA, Adler AB. Correlates and consequences of morale versus depression 
under stressful conditions. J Occup Health Psychol. 2007;12(1):34–47.
 69. Fear NT, Iversen AC, Chatterjee A, et al. Risky driving among regular armed forces personnel from the United Kingdom. Am J Prev Med. 2008;35(3):230–236.
 70. Booth B, Segal MW, Bell DB, et al. What we know about Army families: 2007 update. Family and Morale, Welfare and 
Recreation Command; 2007.
 71. Collins RC, Kennedy MC. Serving families who have served: providing family therapy and support in interdisciplinary polytrauma rehabilitation. J Clin Psychol. 2008;64(8):993–1003.
 72. Orthner DK, Rose R. Work separation demands and spouse psychological well-being. Fam Relat. 2009;58(4):392–403.
 73. Padden DL, Connors RA, Agazio JG. Determinants of health-promoting behaviors in military spouses during deployment separation. Mil Med. 2011;176(1):26–34.
 74. Burton T, Farley D, Rhea A. Stress-induced somatization in spouses of deployed and nondeployed servicemen. J Am 
Acad Nurse Pract. 2009;21(6):332–339.
 75. Hoge CW, Castro CA, Eaton KM. Impact of Combat Duty in Iraq and Afghanistan on Family Functioning: Findings from the 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research Land Combat Study. Silver Spring, MD: WRAIR; 2006. RTO-MP-HFM-134. 
 76. Mansfield AJ, Kaufman JS, Marshall SW, Gaynes BN, Morrissey JP, Engel CC. Deployment and the use of mental 
health services among U.S. Army wives. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(2):101–109.
 77. Goff BSN, Crow JR, Reisbig AM, Hamilton S. The impact of soldiers’ deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan: secondary 
traumatic stress in female partners. J Couple Relats Ther. 2009;8(4):291–305.
 78. Roy MJ, Francis JL. The psychological recovery of physically wounded service members. In: Adler AB, Bliese PD, Castro CAE, eds. Deployment Psychology. Evidenced-Based Strategies to Promote Mental Health in the Military. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association; 2012: 195–216.
377
Psychological Well-Being
 79. Asbury ET, Martin D. Military deployment and the spouse left behind. The Family Journal. 2012;20(1):45–50.
 80. Castro CAE, Clark JC. Work-family balance in soldiers and their families. Paper presented at: Defense Department 
Advisory Committee on Women in the Services (DACOWITS) Business Meeting; May 16, 2005; Silver Spring, MD.
 81. McLeland KC, Sutton GW, Schumm WR. Marital satisfaction before and after deployments associated with the global 
war on terror. Psychol Rep. 2008;103(3):836–844.
 82. Riviere LA, Merrill JC. The impact of combat deployment on military families. In: Adler AB, Bliese PD, Castro CAE, 
eds. Deployment Psychology. Evidenced-Based Strategies to Promote Mental Health in the Military. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2012: 125–149.
 83. Erbes CR, Polusny MA, Macdermid S, Compton JS. Couple therapy with combat veterans and their partners. J Clin 
Psychol. 2008;64(8):972–983.
 84. Galovski T, Lyons JA. Psychological sequelae of combat violence: a review of the impact of PTSD on the veteran’s 
family and possible interventions. Aggress Violent Behav. 2004;9(5):477–501.
 85. Renshaw KD, Rodrigues CS, Jones DH. Combat exposure, psychological symptoms, and marital satisfaction in National 
Guard soldiers who served in Operation Iraqi Freedom from 2005 to 2006. Anxiety Stress Coping. 2009;22(1):101–115.
 86. Lazarus RS, Folkman S. Stress. Appraisal, and Coping. New York, NY: Springer; 1984: 725.
 87. Baldacchino D, Draper P. Spiritual coping strategies: a review of the nursing research literature. J Adv Nurs. 
2001;34(6):833–841. 
 88. DeGraff AH, Schaffer J. Emotion-focused coping: a primary defense against stress for people living with spinal cord 
injury. J Rehabil. 2008;74(1):19.
 89. Dimiceli EE, Steinhardt MA, Smith SE. Stressful experiences, coping strategies, and predictors of health-related outcomes among wives of deployed military servicemen. Armed Forces Soc. 2009;36:351–373.
 90. Bowen GL, Mancini JA, Martin JA, Ware WB, Nelson JP. Promoting the adaptation of military families: an empirical 
test of a community practice model. Fam Relat. 2003;52(1):33–44.
 91. Harrell MC, Lim N, Castaneda LW, Golinelli D. Working Around the Military: Challenges to Military Spouse Employment 
and Education. Santa Monica, CA: Rand National Defense Research Institute; 2004: 1–198.
 92. Cohen F, Kemeny ME, Zegans LS, Johnson P, Kearney KA, Stites DP. Immune function declines with unemployment 
and recovers after stressor termination. Psychosom Med. 2007;69(3):225–234.
 93. McKee-Ryan F, Song Z, Wanberg CR, Kinicki AJ. Psychological and physical well-being during unemployment: a 
meta-analytic study. J Appl Psychol. 2005;90(1):53–76.
 94. Orthner D, Rose R. SAF V Survey Report: Social Support and Adjustment Among Army Civilian Spouses. Chapel 
Hill, NC: University of North Carolina; 2005. Army Social Support and Adjustment Report: 1–10. 
 95. Chandra A, Lara-Cinisomo S, Jaycox LH, et al. Children on the homefront: the experience of children from military 
families. Pediatrics. 2010;125(1):16–25.
 96. Rentz ED, Marshall SW, Loomis D, Casteel C, Martin SL, Gibbs DA. Effect of deployment on the occurrence of child 
maltreatment in military and nonmilitary families. Am J Epidemiol. 2007;165(10):1199–1206.
 97. Marshall AD, Panuzio J, Taft CT. Intimate partner violence among military veterans and active duty servicemen. Clin 
Psychol Rev. 2005;25(7):862–876.
 98. McCarroll JE, Ursano RJ, Liu X, et al. Deployment and the probability of spousal aggression by U.S. Army soldiers. 
Mil Med. 2010;175(5):352–356.
378
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 99. Lucier-Greer M, Arnold AL, Grimsley RN, Ford JL, Bryant C, Mancini JA. Parental military service and adolescent wellbeing: mental health, social connections and coping among youth in the USA. Child Fam Soc Work. 2014;21(4):421–432.
 100. Cohen S, Pressman SD. Positive affect and health. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2006;15(3):122–125. 
 101. Sin NL. The protective role of positive well-being in cardiovascular disease: review of current evidence, mechanisms, 
and clinical implications. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2016;18(11):106.
 102. Zhang Y, Han B. Positive affect and mortality risk in older adults: a meta-analysis. Psych J. 2016;5(2):125–138.
 103. Deuster PA, Schoomaker E. Mindfulness: a fundamental skill for performance sustainment and enhancement. J Spec 
Oper Med. 2015;15(1):93–99.
 104. Montero-Marin J, Tops M, Manzanera R, Piva Demarzo MM, Alvarez de Mon M, Garcia-Campayo J. Mindfulness, 
resilience, and burnout subtypes in primary care physicians: the possible mediating role of positive and negative affect. Front Psychol. 2015;6:1895.
 105. Reker GT, Peacock EJ, Wong PT. Meaning and purpose in life and well-being: a life-span perspective. J Gerontol. 
1987;42(1):44–49.
 106. Zika S, Chamberlain K. On the relation between meaning in life and psychological well-being. Br J Psychol. 
1992;83(1):133–145.
 107. Cohen S, Wills TA. Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis. Psychol Bull. 1985;98(2):310.
 108. McNally ST, Newman S. Objective and subjective conceptualizations of social support. J Psychosom Res. 1999;46(4):309–
314.
 109. Bliese PD, Britt TW. Social support, group consensus and stressor–strain relationships: social context matters. J Organ 
Behav. 2001;22(4):425–436.
 110. Berkman LF, Syme SL. Social networks, host resistance, and mortality: a nine-year follow-up study of Alameda County 
residents. Am J Epidemiol. 1979;109(2):186–204.
 111. Helgeson V, Cohen S, Fritz HL. Social ties and cancer. In: Holland JC, ed. Psycho-Oncology. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press; 1998: 99–109.
 112. House JS, Robbins C, Metzner HL. The association of social relationships and activities with mortality: prospective 
evidence from the Tecumseh community health study. Am J Epidemiol. 1982;116(1):123–140.
 113. Reifman A. Social relationships, recovery from illness, and survival: a literature review. Ann Behav Med. 1995;17(2):124–
131.
 114. Greenberg N, Jones DH. Optimizing mental health support in the military: The role of peers and leaders. In: Adler AB, 
Bliese PD, Castro CAE, eds. Deployment Psychology. Evidenced-Based Strategies to Promote Mental Health in the Military. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2012: 69–101.
 115. Loo CM, Lim BR, Koff G, Morton RK, Kiang PN. Ethnic-related stressors in the war zone: case studies of Asian American Vietnam veterans. Mil Med. 2007;172(9):968–971.
 116. Cohen S, Sherrod DR, Clark MS. Social skills and the stress-protective role of social support. J Pers Soc Psychol. 
1986;50(5):963–973.
 117. Uchino BN, Cacioppo JT, Kiecolt-Glaser JK. The relationship between social support and physiological processes: a 
review with emphasis on underlying mechanisms and implications for health. Psychol Bull. 1996;119(3):488–531.
 118. Thoits PA. Social support and psychological well-being: theoretical possibilities. In: Sarason IG, Sarason BR, eds. Social Support: Theory, Research and Applications. NATO ASI Series (D: Behavioural and Social Sciences). Vol 4. Springer, 
Dordrecht; 1985: 51–72.
379
Psychological Well-Being
 119. van Dam HA, van der Horst FG, Knoops L, Ryckman RM, Crebolder HF, van den Borne BH. Social support in diabetes: 
a systematic review of controlled intervention studies. Patient Educ Couns. 2005;59(1):1–12.
 120. Griffith J. Multilevel analysis of cohesion’s relation to stress, well-being, identification, disintegration, and perceived 
combat readiness. Mil Psychol. 2002;14(3):217.
 121. Armistead-Jehle P, Johnston SL, Wade NG, Ecklund CJ. Posttraumatic stress in US Marines: the role of unit cohesion 
and combat exposure. J Couns Dev. 2011;89(1):81–88.
380
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
