165
Military Communication
Chapter 11
MILITARY COMMUNICATION
ANGELA M. YARNELL, PhD*; CINDY DULLEA, RN, MBA†; and NEIL E. GRUNBERG, PhD‡
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITION
RELEVANCE OF MILITARY AND MEDICAL COMMUNICATION
COMMUNICATION AS IT RELATES TO LEADERSHIP
PRINCIPLES OF EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION 
FORMS OF COMMUNICATION
MILITARY-SPECIFIC COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS
Written Communication
Formal Oral Communication
Counseling and Feedback
OTHER COMMUNICATION CONSIDERATIONS 
Addressing Difficult Topics
Importance of Communication to the Military Family
RESOURCES
SUMMARY
ATTACHMENT: KEY COMPONENTS OF MILITARY COMMUNICATION 
FOR MEDICAL OFFICERS
*Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Research Psychologist, Behavioral Biology Branch, Center for Military Psychiatry Neuroscience Research, 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland
†Rear Admiral (Retired), Nurse Corps, US Navy Reserve; Chief Marketing Officer, Experian Health Inc, Franklin, Tennessee
‡Professor, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
166
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Good communication is a cornerstone of effective 
leadership. To optimize influence, the medical leader 
must provide purpose, direction, and motivation. To 
this end, the medical leader’s primary tools are written, spoken, and nonverbal communication skills. 
Military briefings, military correspondence, checklists, 
and appropriate communication style are all critical 
leadership skills needed in all military settings and 
mission profiles.
Communication is an important component to 
success in the military and in medicine. More than 
the process of exchanging or transferring information in an understandable way, effective communication is a key competency of military and medical 
leaders. 1 To accomplish this goal, military medical 
leaders need to develop social and interpersonal 
communication skills. Though they occur from the 
beginning of life, most people are unaware of their 
strengths and weaknesses when it comes to communication. The purpose of this chapter is to define 
communication, describe the relevance of military 
and medical communication, emphasize the importance of communication to leadership, and provide 
specific examples of effective communication. The 
chapter concludes with specifics about military communication forms and formats.
DEFINITION
Communication in its simplest form is defined as 
the exchange of information; it includes sending and 
receiving information verbally and nonverbally. It is 
inherently an interactive social process2 that facilitates 
understanding between individuals. However, the purpose of communication among military leaders is not 
simply to exchange information; it is also to change or 
influence others so that they perform a desired action. 
Communication can be used to increase awareness of 
issues and provide possible solutions; it can help bridge 
cultural sensitivities and lead to consensus. Ineffective 
communication can have the opposite impact. 
RELEVANCE OF MILITARY AND MEDICAL COMMUNICATION
Conveyance of information by the armed forces is 
vital to military success, and it is especially critical 
for the coordination of action. 3 Passing information 
among troops has been necessary since the first military engagements, and forms of military communication have been transformed along with military 
forces as technology has improved. The earliest communication was delivered on foot by runners carrying 
messages, followed by the use of visual and audible 
signals. Signals were transferred over long distances 
using drums, horns, flags, and riders on horseback. 
While the US Army was the first in the world to have 
a separate communication branch (the Signal Corps, 
formed in 1863, based on the adoption of signal flags 
developed by Army doctor Albert Myer), effective 
use of communications technology (signal flags) was 
a testable skill for certain naval ratings more than a 
century earlier. 
Despite this long history, communication in the 
military and in medicine is subject to limitations. Information can be lost or distorted as it is passed among 
individuals. In business, it is estimated that 80% of 
information is lost as it is translated from top management to the lowest level of employees. 4 This distortion 
can occur if information is intentionally changed, or 
when there is a subtle change in each transmission, like 
the children’s game of telephone. Changes occur based 
on assumptions as well as cognitive, physical, or social 
limitations5 of the sender or receiver. In the military 
and in medicine, loss or distortion of information can 
have catastrophic consequences.
In the military, giving clear and precise instructions 
in the form of orders is important for success. For this 
reason specified formats have been developed to issue 
orders and for most forms of military communication 
(specifics appear later in this chapter). When performance is expected to occur under stressful conditions, 
training and rehearsal become particularly important, 
and communication cannot be forgotten in this process. 
A mark of a highly trained unit is rapid and accurate 
communication that results in automatic responses. 3 
Not only is effective communication vital to military 
success, but it is also key to providing quality medicine. 
Interpersonal and communication skills are one of six 
competencies expected of residents by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education6 and may 
be as crucial as other technical proficiencies in patient 
care. According to a report by the US Department of 
Health and Human Services,7 these skills commonly 
include data-gathering skills (eg, use of open-ended 
questions, particularly in the psychosocial domain); 
relationship skills (eg, use of empathy, reassurance, 
support, and emotional responsiveness); partnering 
skills (eg, paraphrasing, asking for patient opinions, 
negotiation, and joint problem solving); and counseling skills (eg, informativeness, persuasion). 8,9 
167
Military Communication
These necessary patient communication skills are 
collectively referred to as “patient-centeredness”8,10,11 
and are demonstrated via responsiveness to patients’ 
values, needs, and preferences. Effective communication allows healthcare providers to build trust with 
their patients and enhance clinical care. 12–14 Further, 
patient-centered physician behaviors have been associated with positive patient relationships and health 
outcomes. 15,16 Specifically, communication skills have 
been linked to a number of valued patient outcomes, 
including satisfaction, adherence to treatment regimen, 
and positive health indicators. 8 With regard to these 
skills, it is important to consider how characteristics of 
the physician, either innate or shaped by experiences, 
contribute to the patient-provider interaction. Several 
specific components of physician-patient communication valued by American adults have been identified, 
including the values of any effective communication: 
respect, attentiveness, and assuring the communication 
is a dialogue. Beyond verbal communication skills, the 
physician must be able to interpret a patient’s nonverbal cues and adapt communication to individual patients. Dyche17 highlights valuable interpersonal skills 
for medicine, including understanding, empathy, and 
relational versatility. Communicating with patients to 
ensure that they understand the medical care they are 
receiving, often referred to as “informed consent,” is 
also an important skill (Exhibit 11-1) and is especially 
nuanced in the military provider-patient relationship. 
Not only is provider-patient interaction important, 
but also the interaction within medical teams can 
impact medical care. 18 Poor communication among 
medical team members (physicians, nurses, other 
caregivers) is related to greater conflict among these 
groups, disruption in service to patients, medical errors, and reduced quality of care. 19–24 Subtle factors 
involved in communication, such as status or power, 
values, and attitudes,25 can affect the information exchanged among team members. Given these factors, 
optimal communication is key to the development 
and operation of teams. Specifically, the sharing of 
mutual knowledge is accomplished by team members 
frequently listening to each other, participating in joint 
decision-making, and engaging in informal as well 
EXHIBIT 11-1
INFORMED CONSENT 
Medical providers are often required to ensure the patient understands what will happen as it relates to medical 
care and procedures. This process is often done orally, and the provider explains potential risks and benefits of 
medical care or procedures and asks the patient if he or she understands and is ready to receive the care, such as 
in the case of inserting an intravenous line. The process entails transmitting information and receiving consent to 
ensure that the message is received. During treatment of active duty service members, the service members have 
some rights, but their right to refuse care is limited. Knowing these boundaries is important for the military medical officer (MMO). The context of the provider-patient information exchange is also important: on the battlefield, 
there are not a lot of alternative options for receiving care, but in the clinic there may be. Because of these circumstances, establishing a patient-provider relationship beyond the one that comes with the uniform or based on rank 
is important. To establish trust, the MMO should leverage commonalities between the patient and the provider (eg, 
both wear the uniform, speak a common language). Providers must know when to use or not use vernacular and be 
mindful of the context. Some tips for developing this kind of interaction include:
 
• engaging patients and patient populations at every opportunity
 
• ask about common acronyms
 
• ask about their jobs
 
• do not be afraid to ask 
 
• understand patient identity
 
• practice military bearing
 
• seek out opportunities for improvement (eg, a committee that provides other people’s perspectives, such as 
a risk management committee or patient complaint committee)
 
• break through rank structure when possible (eg, not wearing the uniform) 
 
• be a lifelong learner, seeking answers and sharing information with colleagues 
 
• know what must be disclosed to patients’ leadership, which may differ by unit or service (eg, pregnancy, 
other potential limitations related to a diagnosis, substance abuse, suicidal ideation)
 
• try to develop a therapeutic alliance prior to making necessary disclosures that may facilitate the patient to 
self-disclose, eg, ask “who would you like me to talk to in your command?” 
 
• support patients through the process 
168
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
as formal interactions. 26 Enhancing the interaction of 
teams is ultimately about leadership, and leadership 
is an obvious intersection between being a medical 
provider and being a military officer. The following 
section addresses communication and its important 
implications for leading military medical teams. 
COMMUNICATION AS IT RELATES TO LEADERSHIP
There is a strong positive correlation between communication and leadership effectiveness. 27 Leaders who 
demonstrate communication skills are considered more 
effective than leaders who do not communicate well. 
Each of the services incorporates communication into 
leadership principles in similar ways (Exhibit 11-2). 
Leaders communicate more than do other group 
members, but it is not always about how much is 
communicated; rather, the quality of what is communicated and the way in which the communication 
occurs may be more important than the quantity. 28 Effective communication occurs when leaders are skilled 
in self-presentation and impression management29,30; 
when they listen and care about their followers’ perspective; and when they motivate followers by framing 
their communication according to that perspective. 
These behaviors are all evidence of highly developed 
communication skills. 28 These skills go beyond the 
traditional personality traits often associated with 
“good” communicators (eg, sociability, extraversion, 
assertiveness); other necessary skills include the ability 
to decode information or cues from others and to adapt 
communication to changing situations. 28 
Leaders must develop social and interpersonal skills 
EXHIBIT 11-2
COMMUNICATION AS IT RELATES TO LEADERSHIP BY SERVICE 
Army
According to Army Regulation 600-100,1 “Leaders communicate by expressing ideas and actively listening to others. Effective leaders understand the nature and power of communication and practice effective communication 
techniques so they can better relate to others and translate goals into actions. Communication is essential to all 
other leadership competencies.” Additionally, according to Army Field Manual 6-22,2 “Communication needs to 
achieve a new understanding . . . . Leaders cannot lead, supervise, build teams, counsel, coach, or mentor without 
the ability to communicate clearly.” 
Air Force
Air Force leadership doctrine (AFDD 1-13) highlights communication as a tool for Air Force leaders, who must 
facilitate communication to “ensure a free flow of information and communication up, down, across, and within an 
organization by actively listening and encouraging the open expression of ideas and opinions.” 
Navy
The Naval Leadership Competency Model, proposed to improve the definition of leadership by defining the expected behaviors and knowledge of Navy leaders, includes “working with people” as one of its five core competencies, with subcompetencies of written and oral communication. 4
Marines
One of the primary leadership resources for the US Marine Corps is Marine Corps Warfighting Publication 6-11, 
Leading Marines,5 which emphasizes qualities of the individual leader and leadership principles. Critical communication components can be surmised from traits (eg, tact, bearing) and principles, which are trained starting in boot 
camp and professional training for officers. 
1. Department of the Army. Army Profession and Leadership Policy. Washington, DC: HQDA; 5 April 2017. AR 600-100.
2. Department of the Army. Army Leadership. Washington, DC: HQDA; October 2006. FM 6-22.
3. Department of the Air Force. Leadership and Force Development. Washington, DC: USAF; 8 November 2011. Air Force Doctrine 
Document 1. 1.
4. Air University website. Navy Leadership Competency Model. http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/navy/navy-ldr-comp.htm. 
Accessed August 26, 2018.
5. Department of the Navy. Leading Marines. Washington, DC: US Marine Corps; 27 November 2002. Marine Corps Warfighting 
Publication 6-11. 
169
Military Communication
to be effective communicators, specifically, social skills 
such as self-monitoring,31 behavioral flexibility,32 and 
social intelligence, and interpersonal skills including 
interpersonal acumen33 and emotional intelligence. 
An important aspect of social skill is self-monitoring. 
Self-monitoring can be described as the ability to 
adapt one’s behavior to perform appropriately in social situations by assessing those situations. 34,35 High 
self-monitors adapt to situations around them better 
than low-self monitors and are more likely to emerge 
as leaders. Skillful communication requires this kind 
of adaptation. 28 Socially skilled communicators adapt 
based on audience reaction; critical feedback; changes 
in the environment or situation in which the communication is taking place; and updated facts or new developments relevant to communication. Socially skilled 
leaders perform better under stressful situations. 36
In medicine, better social skills used in communication facilitate agreement from patients on difficult 
treatment decisions and long-term compliance with 
treatment plans. 37–40 Social skill in communicating includes expressivity (sending), sensitivity (decoding), 
and control (regulating communication), which occur 
in the verbal/social domain as well as the nonverbal/
emotional domain. A skilled communicator demonstrates expertise by balancing each of these three 
competencies across both domains. 41 These skills are 
trainable and evolve with experience. Specifically, 
social expressivity and social control improve through 
clinical experience, receiving feedback from attending 
physicians, and interactions with patients and peers. 42 
Social expressivity and social control may contribute to a greater amount of social intelligence. As described by Zaccaro,31 a person with social intelligence 
is able to perceive and interpret social situations and 
is also flexible and adaptable in his or her behaviors. 
Social intelligence is particularly important for effective leadership, especially the higher an individual 
moves up in an organization, where he or she is likely 
to experience more complex social situations. 31 
In addition to social skills, effective communicators 
possess necessary interpersonal skills or interpersonal 
sensitivity. These skills include listening and decoding 
abilities, which develop good relationships that lead 
to increased subordinate satisfaction. 43,44 Emotional 
intelligence is important for interpersonal interactions. 
Emotional intelligence represents the ability to:
 
• monitor the emotions of self and others,
 
• differentiate distinct emotions,
 
• label emotions correctly, and
 
• use this information to guide behavior. 45
Leader-follower relationships are highly dependent 
on emotional intelligence. A leader needs to be able 
to perceive the emotions of others as well as generate 
and regulate his or her own emotions. 46 Emotional 
intelligence can be a leadership attribute (ie, it comes 
naturally to some leaders) or it may require training 
and practice to accomplish it fully and genuinely. 
In practice, understanding and being receptive to 
the emotions of others enhances communication. To 
influence an audience of followers or subordinates, 
a leader must first appreciate how that audience 
feels and thinks, and what they care about, as well as 
genuinely respond to these thoughts and feelings. 2 To 
motivate followers into action through communication, the leader must first understand what motivates 
them, or “meet them where they are.” Followers and 
patients have their own ideas, feelings, concerns, and 
perspectives, and effective communicators start by 
taking these aspects seriously. Leaders who arouse, 
inspire, and motivate followers via effective communication are typically demonstrating transformational 
leadership. 28 This form of leadership is associated with 
more satisfied and higher performing groups. 
Active listening is another interpersonal skill that 
can be used to understand what motivates followers. 
An active listener avoids interruption, indicates to the 
speaker that he or she is attentive, keeps mental or written notes to follow up on once the speaker is finished, 
does not form a response instead of listening to the 
entire message being conveyed, and is not distracted 
or otherwise impeded from listening. An active listener 
is absorbing not only what is said, but also how it is 
said, and attempts to appreciate the emotion in the 
message in addition to the content. 
It is clear why effective communication skills are 
important to military medical leadership, but exactly 
how to achieve skill with communication requires additional information. The next section provides specific 
examples about how to communicate effectively. 
PRINCIPLES OF EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION
Principles of effective communication stem from 
social psychological research, which originated 
with the concept of informal social communication. 
In a ground-breaking study, Festinger, Back, and 
Schachter found that functional space as opposed to 
the physical environment had a greater influence on 
the amount and quality of communication among 
neighbors in a housing complex. 47 Schachter’s role in 
this research was influenced by his time serving in 
the Army Signal Corps. Functional space is a simple 
concept that can be applied on the battlefield as well 
as in the clinic. For example, the set-up of a triage area 
170
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
or treatment tent in the field can make or break effective communication. If the surgeon is able to treat two 
patients simultaneously with the assistance of medics 
or corpsmen, then he or she will be more efficient, and 
this added efficiency can be facilitated by orchestrating the functional space. The communicator should 
always consider manipulating the environment to 
facilitate communication. Some specific examples for 
military medicine include horseshoe formations, noise 
reduction, face-to-face versus email communication, 
and use of social media. 
Additional concepts for enhancing effective communication can be gleaned from psychological research. 
The timing or order of information presentation is 
important. For example, items or arguments offered at 
the beginning of the communication are best remembered, which is referred to as primacy. 48 In the military, 
the concept of giving the “BLUF,” or “bottom line up 
front,” is used to convey the most important information, or a summary, before providing all the details. 
This practice allows for efficient communication and is 
favored by many in military culture, especially senior 
leadership. Like primacy, research also supports the 
notion of recency, where arguments made at the end 
of a communication are well remembered. 48 Effective 
communication also includes repetition of key concepts to increase their salience for the audience. 
The credibility of the communicator has a great effect on how and how well the information is received. 
Military medical officers (MMOs) are often challenged 
to prove their credibility in situations where they interact with line-level commanders and patients. For 
example, the unit surgeon is the medical advisor to the 
commander and therefore should establish credibility 
for providing necessary medical information about 
the unit and its mission. The credibility of a physician also may be key in patient interactions. Patients 
must find their doctor credible to take advice about 
their health. There are ways to increase the perceived 
credibility of the communicator. The first is to defend 
against or minimize perceived self-interest. 49 When 
it is perceived that the communicator stands to gain 
more from the communication than those who are 
receiving it, the information is often not effective. If 
the communicator is at least able to demonstrate a 
shared interest, he or she is more likely to be viewed 
as credible and the communicated information will 
be better received.
The MMO must know when to highlight medical 
credentials versus military credentials. For example, 
when building rapport, sometimes it may be important 
for the patient to be understood as a service member, 
and related to in that way; whereas, in other situations, patients may want to be more confident in their 
provider’s medical knowledge and ability to address 
their concerns. Reading the patient’s body language 
and developing a rapport that facilitates communication is important to establish credibility. In interactions 
in which trust seems lacking (eg, noncompliance by 
patient), the MMO must take steps to build credibility 
or trust. Asking, “What do you need to know about 
me as a physician?” may be a good place to start when 
it seems that the patient is questioning the MMO’s 
medical knowledge. Then providing information about 
credentials such as, “I have these qualifications” or “I 
have this number of years of training” or “I have the 
same qualifications as doctors at X civilian hospital” 
may be good information to share. 
Another way to establish credibility is to demonstrate it over time. The “sleeper effect” is a phenomenon in which over time the source of the information 
is forgotten and only the content is remembered. 50,51 
An MMO may accomplish this form of credibility by 
slowly but consistently performing at or above the expectations of those around him or her. This consistent 
build, often in small ways (eg, respectful interactions 
with subordinates, always being early or on time for 
obligations), will over time lead to a positive regard for 
the leader or communicator. Ultimately, the best way 
to establish and maintain credibility is to ensure words 
are matched by actions; otherwise, the communicator 
is viewed as not credible. 2 
FORMS OF COMMUNICATION
There are two main forms of communication: verbal 
and nonverbal. Important aspects of verbal or spoken 
communication to keep in mind include volume, verbal tics, silence, tone, phrasing, pitch, tempo, rhythm, 
accents, dialect, and use of colorful language. Characteristics of nonverbal communication include attire, 
position and proximity, movement, facial expressions, 
body language, eye contact, gestures, interactions with 
media, and interactions with audience or listeners. 
Military bearing is a key component of both verbal 
and nonverbal communication. Military bearing is 
described as projecting a commanding presence, an 
image of authority and discipline. This attribute carries 
great importance for communication and leadership 
for military officers. Leaders and communicators are 
judged based on three observable attributes: bearing, 
how the communicator engages with others, and words 
used for the interaction. Judgments based on bearing 
are made in the first 15 seconds. Before a word is even 
spoken, the audience is judging the speaker and deciding if they should pay attention, if they can rely on 
what he or she is saying, and whether or not he or she 
171
Military Communication
is credible; these decisions can define the audience’s 
reaction regardless of what the speaker has to say. 2 A 
communicator who displays nervousness or discomfort 
will cause the audience to look away and disengage, 
while one who displays comfort and confidence will 
capture the audience’s attention. A communicator can 
establish a physical presence of confidence by planting 
his or her feet further apart than natural, or taking on 
a position of power. 52,53 Even if the speaker does not 
inwardly feel confident, taking on this position will 
convey confidence and command the audience’s attention. Formal appearance, from the cleanliness of one’s 
uniform, to adherence to height and weight standards, 
to style and amount of makeup, will also be judged as 
part of the communicator’s bearing. 
The communicator’s subsequent behaviors are also 
important to connecting with the audience. Looking 
down, random hand movements, shuffling of feet, licking lips, looking at objects versus people, and speaking 
in a monotone voice all cause an audience to disengage. 
These behaviors can have compounding effects and 
diminish the speaker’s effectiveness. However, the use 
of gestures should not be completely discouraged. In 
fact, when a speaker uses gestures the audience retains 
more of the information being transmitted, especially 
when the voice, gestures, and content of the speech 
are well aligned and gestures allow the speaker to 
use different voice effects (eg, varying volume, pitch, 
speed, pauses). The speaker should also move around 
in concert with what is being said, not randomly. 
EXHIBIT 11-3
CHECKLIST EXAMPLES 
SOAP Note
The “SOAP note” is a way to document medical 
information and increase communication among 
members of a medical team. 
S: Subjective, or what the patient tells you. 
O: Objective, or the physical findings of the 
exam. 
A: Assessment, or your interpretation of the 
patient’s condition. 
P: Plan, which may include medical treatment, 
additional diagnostic tests needed (eg, x-ray, 
magnetic resonance imaging); special instructions (eg, handouts, when to return to clinic). 
“Time-out” Procedure
The “time-out” procedure is a standardized protocol used to prevent mistakes prior to medical 
procedures and enhance communication among 
team members. A time-out involves the immediate 
members of the procedure team (eg, individual performing the procedure, anesthesia providers, nurse). 
During the time-out, the team members agree, at a 
minimum, about the following:
• patient identity
• correct site
• procedure to be done
MILITARY-SPECIFIC COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS
There are requirements and nuances of communicating in the military, which include specifications for 
written communications, formal oral communications 
(military briefings), and counseling or feedback. This 
section outlines some of the resources available for 
written communication, military briefings, and providing counseling and feedback. 
Written Communication
Specific regulations are associated with written 
correspondence and communication in the military. 
Memorandums and executive summaries (EXSUMs) 
are examples of specific written correspondence. An 
EXSUM is a short document or section of a document 
in which a summary of the longer report is provided 
to allow for rapid acquaintance with a large body of 
material without having to read it all. This summary 
is typically provided to higher leadership to inform 
them of a body of work or other important information. Table 11-1 provides a list of resources with guidance to prepare an EXSUM (however, organizations 
often develop their own guidance for writing an 
EXSUM based on the leadership preferences). Table 
11-1 also lists specific service manuals for written 
communication. 
Formal Oral Communication 
Military briefings are a form of formal oral communication. Military briefings include informational briefings, operations orders briefings, course 
of action briefs, military decision-making processes, 
and rehearsals. Each service has a specific way in 
which these briefings are planned and carried out. 
See Table 11-1 for a list of resources available to 
prepare formal oral communications. Checklists 
are also useful in planning and delivering briefings. 
Various checklists are created at the service as well 
as unit levels and can be found in respective service 
field manuals and similar publications (see Table 
172
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 11-1
MILITARY-SPECIFIC COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS 
Topic
Service
Manual
Title
Written Communication
General
Army
AR 25-50
Preparing and Managing Correspondence1
DA Pam 600-67
Effective Writing for Army Leaders2
Air Force
Air Force Manual 33-326
Preparing Official Communications3
Navy
SECNAV Manual M-5216. 5
Correspondence Manual4
EXSUM
Army
TRADOC Regulation 1-11
Staff Procedures5 (Chapter 3. 5)
Navy/Marine Corps [No number]
A Guide to Writing an Effective Executive Summary6
Oral Communication
Formal
Army
Field Manual 6-0
Commander and Staff Organization and Operation7
Air Force
Air Force Handbook 33-337
The Tongue and Quill8
Briefing
Joint
Joint Forces Staff College Publication 1 The Joint Staff Officers Guide9 (Chapter 5)
AR: Army Regulation; DA Pam: Department of the Army Pamphlet; EXSUM: executive summary; SECNAV: secretary of the Navy; TRADOC: 
Training and Doctrine Command 
1. https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/r25_50.pdf
2. http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/army/p600_67.pdf
3. http://static.e-publishing.af.mil/production/1/saf_cio_a6/publication/afman33-326/afman33-326.pdf
4. https://www.marines.mil/Portals/59/Publications/SECNAV%20M%205216. 5.pdf
5. http://www.tradoc.army.mil/tpubs/regs/tr1-11.pdf
6. https://www.med.navy.mil/sites/nmcphc/Documents/environmental-programs/risk-communication/Appendix_E_Guide_to_Writing_ 
Effective_Executive_Summary.pdf
7. https://armypubs.army.mil/ProductMaps/PubForm/Details.aspx?PUBNO=FM+6-0
8. http://static.e-publishing.af.mil/production/1/saf_cio_a6/publication/afh33-337/afh33-337.pdf
9. http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/pub1/index2000.htm
11-1). Other checklists relevant for MMOs include 
“SOAP” notes and “time-out” checks before procedures (Exhibit 11-3 provides examples). Rehearsals 
(often called rehearsal of concept, or ROC, drills 
in the military) can allow leaders to ensure their 
subordinates understand the upcoming operation 
and know how and when to act and how to communicate during the operation (“operation” refers 
to any collective task that a group may be attempting to accomplish). 
Combat orders enable a leader to communicate 
in a timely manner (see Chapter 18). There are three 
types of combat orders: operation order (OPORD), 
warning order (WARNO), and fragmentary order 
(FRAGO). The OPORD is utilized by a commander 
to effect the coordinated execution of an operation. A 
WARNO normally precedes the full operation order 
and is a preliminary notice that the complete order is 
to follow. A FRAGO is used to communicate updates 
or changes to an existing order. The OPORD follows 
a five-paragraph format, which is shared among the 
US armed forces and NATO allies. These orders are 
given in written and oral formats. 
Counseling and Feedback 
Providing subordinates with evaluation of their 
performance is a critical part of leadership in the 
military. Evaluation is accomplished in a number of 
informal and formal ways. “On-the-spot” feedback is 
an example of informal evaluation in which the leader 
makes a necessary corrective action to undesirable behavior or provides praise for a job well done. Formal 
evaluation takes place through counseling (written and 
oral), performance evaluation, and awards. As mentioned earlier, it is important to provide subordinates 
with expectations of their behavior and performance. 
These expectations are communicated during formal 
counseling sessions, often in the form of performance 
objectives to be accomplished. 
Good behavior should be rewarded through various 
methods. The first is public praise, such as positive 
words spoken in front of peers at a staff meeting. Good 
behavior can also be recognized with coins, certificates 
of appreciation, and awards. Awards should be used 
to recognize performance that goes above and beyond 
duties as assigned. Specific guidance for these pro173
Military Communication
cesses can be found in service regulations, department 
instructions, and other similar publications (eg, Army 
Regulation [AR] AR 600-8-2254 and AR 215-1,55 Navy 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery Instruction 1650. 1A,56 
and Air Force Instruction 36-280357). 
Behavior that detracts from the unit’s mission, disparages others, or is in general conduct unbecoming 
a military member should also be addressed. For the 
most part, this kind of behavior should be corrected 
in private. Leaders need to hold all their subordinates 
accountable for their actions to facilitate mission success. To do this, the leader must sometimes correct 
bad behavior. The process by which undesirable 
behavior can be addressed includes both informal 
leader-subordinate interactions and formal actions 
(eg, counseling statement, reprimand, or admonition; 
see service-specific publications such as AR 600-8-104, 
Army Military Human Resources Management,58 and AFI 
36-2907, Unfavorable Information File Program59). Proactive and constructive feedback, including assertive 
communication and the effective use of praise, can 
facilitate good leader-subordinate relationships while 
increasing morale and resilience in groups. 
There are also tools available to facilitate unit-level 
feedback. After action reviews (AARs), for example, 
are an excellent venue to assess the performance of 
a unit. AARs are important to define best practices 
as well as ensure process improvement. Originally 
developed by the Army and described in Training 
Circular (TC) 25-20, Leader’s Guide to After-Action 
Reviews,60 AARs are now used in all services as well 
as in many nonmilitary settings. The formal process 
to conduct an AAR includes statements regarding (a) a 
description of events that occurred, (b) things that went 
well, and (c) things that can be improved. Whether or not 
the AAR is conducted in a formal or informal manner, this 
form of communication is a valuable tool in the operation 
of any organization. 
OTHER COMMUNICATION CONSIDERATIONS 
Addressing Difficult Topics
A communication challenge that MMOs often face is 
the need to address difficult material or topics. The burden is often on leaders to handle uncomfortable topics2 
and on medical providers to address negative health 
issues. In these situations, it is best to ensure consistency of message, appropriate tone, and timeliness. 
Allowing the situation to linger because of personal 
worry, embarrassment, or fear may only make things 
worse. Followers want to know that their leader is in 
control, and patients look to the provider for answers 
and guidance. However, rash decision-making is not 
a good option either. As mentioned in the attachment 
to this chapter, the “first mover advantage” should 
be used in situations when the leader is expected by 
followers to act immediately, when the followers or 
others (critics) are already discussing the situation, 
and especially when silence will be perceived as indifference. A leader who delays communication in these 
instances loses the ability to control the outcome of 
the conversation or situation. 2 In these circumstances 
it is also important to be aware that words matter and 
different words can have different impacts, which are 
additional reasons to plan and prepare for difficult 
communications. 
Importance of Communication to the Military 
Family
While beyond the scope of this chapter, consideration of similarities and differences when communicating with military family members compared to the military member should not be overlooked. Dependents 
play vital support roles in the medical care and life of 
the service member, and he MMO should be aware of 
any unique circumstances. The MMO must recognize 
the unique stressors and dynamics associated with 
military life that may be operating in their patients’ 
and patients’ family lives. According to the civilian 
literature, the four most important factors for a family 
member of a patient when receiving bad news from 
a medical provider are (1) the provider’s attitude, (2) 
clarity of the message, (3) privacy, and (4) the provider’s 
ability to answer questions. Also, it is important for 
MMOs to be aware of and educated about the different rules for disclosure of information when treating 
service members versus dependents (see Chapter 5).
RESOURCES
Key components of communication for MMOs 
include purpose, direction, motivation, style, and 
planning. These are discussed in the attachment to 
this chapter. Other resources include Garcia’s book, 
Power of Communication: The Skills to Build Trust, Inspire 
Loyalty, and Lead Effectively,2 and Dyche’s article, “Interpersonal Skill in Medicine.”17 As mentioned, each 
service has published communication manuals listed 
in Table 11-1; the services have also posted writing 
advice on the following websites:
174
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
• http://www.armywriter.com/army-writingreferences.htm 
 
• http://www.navywriter.com/ 
 
• http://www.airforcewriter.com/
SUMMARY
Effective communication is important for military and medical leadership. MMOs must strive to 
develop, refine, and master social and interpersonal 
skills to become effective communicators and leaders. In military leadership and medicine, saying the 
right thing in the right way may not be enough. 
Skillful communication should be considered a 
“force multiplier” to be used alongside other important technical and tactical competencies in the 
MMO’s toolkit. 
REFERENCES
 
1. US Army. Be, Know, Do: Leadership the Army Way: Adapted from the Official Army Leadership Manual. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass; 2004.
 
2. Garcia HF. Power of Communication: The Skills to Build Trust, Inspire Loyalty, and Lead Effectively. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: FT Press; 2012.
 
3. King A. The word of command communication and cohesion in the military. Armed Forces Soc. 2006;32:493–512. 
 
4. Hawkins BL, Preston P. Managerial Communication. Santa Monica, CA: Goodyear Publishing Company; 1981.
 
5. Stohl C, Redding WC. Messages and message exchange processes. Process Commun Behav Organ. 1988;25:451–502.
 
6. Holmboe ES, Edgar L, Hamsta S. The Milestones Handbook. Chicago, IL: Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education; 2016: 20. http://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/MilestonesGuidebook.pdf. Accessed June 21, 2017.
 
7. US Department of Health and Human Services. Communicating Health: Priorities and Strategies for Progress. Washington, 
DC: Government Printing Office; 2003.
 
8. Lipkin MJ, Putnam SM, Lazare A, et al, eds. The Medical Interview: Clinical Care, Education, and Research. Heidelberg 
and New York; Springer; 2011. 
 
9. Roter D. The enduring and evolving nature of the patient–physician relationship. Patient Educ Couns. 2000:39(1):5–15.
 10. Mead N, Bower P. Patient-centeredness: a conceptual framework and review of the empirical literature. Soc Sci Med. 
2000:51(7):1087–1110.
 11. Tressolini C. Health Professions Education and Relationship-Centered Care: Report of Pew-Fetzer Task Force. San Francisco, 
CA: Pew Health Professions Commission; 1994.
 12. Joos SK, Hickam DH, Gordon GH, Baker LH. Effects of a physician communication intervention on patient care outcomes. J Gen Intern Med. 1996:11(3):147–155.
 13. Levinson W, Chaumeton N. Communication between surgeons and patients in routine office visits. Surgery. 
1999:125(2):127–134.
 14. Roter DL, Hall JA, Katz NR. Patient-physician communication: a descriptive summary of the literature. Patient Educ 
Couns. 1988:12(2):99–119.
 15. Makoul G. Essential elements of communication in medical encounters: the Kalamazoo consensus statement. Acad 
Med. 2001:76(4):390–393.
 16. Braddock CH 3rd, Edwards KA, Hasenberg NM, Laidley TL, Levinson W. Informed decision making in outpatient 
practice: time to get back to basics. JAMA. 1999:282(24):2313–2320.
 17. Dyche L. Interpersonal skill in medicine: the essential partner of verbal communication. J Gen Intern Med. 2007:22(7):1035–
1039.
175
Military Communication
 18. Michan S, Rodger S. Characteristics of effective teams: a literature review. Aust Health Rev. 2000:23(3):201–208.
 19. Friedman DM, Berger DL. Improving team structure and communication: a key to hospital efficiency. Arch Surg. 
2004:139(11):1194–1198.
 20. McCue JD, Beach KJ. Communication barriers between attending physicians and residents. J Gen Intern Med. 
1994:9(3):158–161.
 21. Rosenstein AH, O’Daniel M. Disruptive behavior and clinical outcomes: perceptions of nurses and physicians. Am J 
Nurs. 2005:105(1):54–64.
 22. Sutcliffe KM, Lewton E, Rosenthal MM. Communication failures: an insidious contributor to medical mishaps. Acad 
Med. 2004:79(2):186–194.
 23. Thomas EJ, Sexton JB, Helmreich RL. Discrepant attitudes about teamwork among critical care nurses and physicians. 
Crit Care Med. 2003:31(3):956–959.
 24. Vincent C, Moorthy K, Sarker SK, Chang A, Darzi AW. Systems approaches to surgical quality and safety: from concept 
to measurement. Ann Surg. 2004:239(4):475–482.
 25. Loxley A. Collaboration in Health and Welfare: Working With Difference. London, England: Jessica Kingsley; 1997.
 26. Headrick LA, Wilcock PM, Batalden PB. Interprofessional working and continuing medical education. BMJ. 
1998:316(7133):771–774.
 27. Bates MJ, Fallesen JJ, Huey WS, et al. Total Force Fitness in units, part 1: military demand-resource model. Mil Med. 
2013:178(11):1164–1182.
 28. Riggio RE, Riggio HR, Salinas C, Cole EJ. The role of social and emotional communication skills in leader emergence 
and effectiveness. Group Dynamics Theory Res Pract. 2003:7(2):83–103.
 29. Chemers M. An Integrative Theory of Leadership. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Elrbaum Associates; 1997.
 30. Leary MR. Self-presentational processes in leadership emergence and effectiveness. In: Giacalone GR, Rosenfeld P, 
eds. Impression Management in the Organization. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1989: 363–374.
 31. Zaccaro SJ. Organizational leadership and social intelligence. In: Riggio RE, Murphy SE, Pirozzolo FJ, eds. Multiple 
Intelligences and Leadership. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; 2002: 29–54. LEA’s Organization and Management Series.
 32. Kenny DA, Zaccaro SJ. An estimate of variance due to traits in leadership. J Appl Psychol. 1983;68:678–685.
 33. Aditya R, Hause RJ. Interpersonal acumen and leadership across cultures: Pointers from the GLOBE study. In: Riggio 
RE, Murphy SE, Pirozzolo FJ, eds. Multiple Intelligences and Leadership. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; 2002: 215–240. 
LEA’s Organization and Management Series.
 34. Snyder M. Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1974:30(4) 526–537.
 35. Snyder M. Public Appearances, Private Realities: The Psychology of Self-Monitoring. New York, NY: WH Freeman; 1987
 36. Halverson, SK, Murphy SE, Riggio RE. Charismatic leadership in crisis situations: a laboratory investigation of stress 
and crisis. Small Group Res. 2004:35(5):495–514.
 37. Kerse N, Buetow S, Mainous AG 3rd, Young G, Coster G, Arroll B. Physician-patient relationship and medication 
compliance: a primary care investigation. Ann Fam Med. 2004:2(5):455–461.
 38. Ong LM, de Haes JC, Hoos AM, Lammes FB. Doctor-patient communication: a review of the literature. Soc Sci Med. 
1995:40(7):903–918.
 39. Schneider J. Kaplan SH, Greenfield S, Li W, Wilson IB. Better physician-patient relationships are associated with higher 
reported adherence to antiretroviral therapy in patients with HIV infection. J Gen Intern Med. 2004:19(11):1096–1103.
176
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 40. Smith VA, DeVellis BM, Kalet A, Roberts JC, DeVellis RF. Encouraging patient adherence: primary care physicians’ 
use of verbal compliance-gaining strategies in medical interviews. Patient Educ Couns. 2005:57(1):62–76.
 41. Riggio RE. Assessment of basic social skills. J Pers Social Psychol. 1986:51(3):649–660.
 42. Horwitz IB, Horwitz SK, Brandt ML, Brunicardi FC, Scott BG, Awad SS. Assessment of communication skills of surgical residents using the Social Skills Inventory. Am J Surg. 2007: 94(3):401–405.
 43. Riggio RE. Interpersonal sensitivity research and organizational psychology: Theoretical and methodological applications. In: Hall JA, Bernieri FJ, eds. Interpersonal Sensitivity: Theory and Measurement Mahwah, NJ; Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates; 2001: 305–317. LEA Series in Personality and Clinical Psychology.
 44. Riggio RE, Zimmerman J. Social skills and interpersonal relationships: Influences on social support and support seeking. Adv Personal Relationships. 1991;2:133–155.
 45. Goleman D. Working with Emotional Intelligence. New York, NY: Bantam; 1998. 
 46. Mayer J, Salovey P. What Is Emotional Intelligence? Emotional Development and Emotional Intelligence: Education Implications. New York, NY: Basic Books; 1997.
 47. Festinger L, Back KW, Schachter S. Social Pressures in Informal Groups: A Study of Human Factors in Housing. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press; 1950.
 48. Miller N, Campbell DT. Recency and primacy in persuasion as a function of the timing of speeches and measurements. 
J Abnorm Psychol. 1959:59(1):1–9.
 49. Lumsdaine AA, Janis IL. Resistance to “counterpropaganda” produced by one-sided and two-sided “propaganda” 
presentations. Public Opinion Q. 1953:17(3):311–318.
 50. Hovland CI, Weiss W. The influence of source credibility on communication effectiveness. Public Opinion Q. 1951:15:635–
650.
 51. Margolis RH. What do your patients remember? Hear J. 2004:57(6):10–12.
 52. Carney DR, Cuddy AJ, Yap AJ. Power posing brief nonverbal displays affect neuroendocrine levels and risk tolerance. 
Psychol Sci. 2010:21(10):1363–1368.
 53. Cuddy AJ, Wilmuth CA, Carney DR. The benefit of power posing before a high-stakes social evaluation. Harvard 
Business School Working Paper, No. 13-027, 2012. https://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/9547823/13-027.
pdf?sequence=1. Accessed June 21, 2017.
 54. Department of the Army. Military Awards. Washington, DC: HQDA; 25 June 2015. Army Regulation 600-8-22.
 55. Department of the Army. Morale, Welfare, and Recreation Programs and Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities. Washington, 
DC: HQDA; 24 September 2010. Army Regulation 215-1. 
 56. Department of the Navy. Navy Medicine Military Awards Program. Falls Church, VA: Department of Medicine, Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery; 21 September 2015. BUMED Instruction 1650. 1.
 57. Department of the Air Force. Air Force Military Awards and Decorations Program. Washington, DC: USAF; 2013. Air Force 
Instruction 36-2803.
 58. Department of the Army. Army Military Human Resources Management. Washington, DC: HQDA; 2 August 2012. AR 600-8-104.
 59. Department of the Air Force. Unfavorable Information File Program. Washington, DC: USAF: 26 November 2014. AFI 36-2907
 60. Department of the Army A Leader’s Guide To After-Action Reviews. Washington, DC: HQDA; 30 September 1993. Training 
Circular 25-20.
177
Military Communication
ATTACHMENT: KEY COMPONENTS OF MILITARY COMMUNICATION FOR MEDICAL OFFICERS
Clarity in military communication has long been recognized as critical. As military operations became increasingly complex, military communication styles became more rigorous. In 1897, Eden Swift introduced a stylized 
field order based on Prussian staff experience. 1 This format evolved under the influence of the US Army’s new 
Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and became a global military standard. 2 Military services today share 
a passion for clarity in communication; modern business and other public communications have benefited from 
the military example and history. Currently, five key components of effective communication are recognized, 
as discussed below.
Purpose. Communication that provides purpose demonstrates to the receiver the leader’s or speaker’s vision 
for necessary subsequent action. 3 Providing purpose ensures the receivers of the communication have a “bigger picture” idea about the work or tasks they are being asked to carry out. When followers are able to see or 
understand the greater purpose of their tasks, they may be more invested in a successful outcome. 
Direction. In addition to purpose, military communication should provide direction. Direction includes additional information regarding the intent of the leader or speaker, and also conveys expectations of how or to 
what standard the tasks must be accomplished. As the US Marine Corps manual Warfighting makes clear, communicators, regardless of format, must “establish what we want to accomplish, why, and how. Without a clearly 
identified concept and intent, the necessary unity of effort is inconceivable.”4(p82) When followers are given clear 
and specific guidance, they are more likely to accomplish the task in a timely manner and in a way consistent 
with the desires of the leader. Followers may have the ability to meaningfully contribute to the way in which a 
task is carried out. For this reason, the leader must be adaptive in how he or she communicates direction. Often 
a focus on the standard (eg, deadline, quality, quantity) will convey enough information to allow for effective 
and efficient completion without the leader specifically stating “how” to do it. 
Motivation. Effective military communication should inspire an individual to complete the task while setting 
expectations. If expectations are ambiguous or not met, it leads to disappointment. For this reason expectations 
must not only be set, but also managed. If the situation changes and expectations must be altered, it is better to 
alter the expectations than allow them to go unmet altogether.
Communication is a facet of human interaction; it is shaped by human nature in both sending and receiving. 
As the purposes of stylized communication have become broader, the need for more complex communications 
has become clear. Many modern communications experts have based their studies on military doctrine. One 
of the more successful was Professor Helio F. Garcia. According to Garcia, the ultimate goal of communication 
is changing how people think, motivating them to action. Communication will therefore invariably be shaped 
by emotions and subject to the “complexities, inconsistencies, and particularities which characterize human 
behavior.”5(p188) In some situations, a communicator cannot meet emotion coming from a listener with a logical 
argument. Emotional communications must first be met with an emotional response, and then guided to logic. 
For example, an aggrieved individual must be addressed first with regret, sorrow, or at least empathy, regardless of the end goal of the communication.
Style. Effective communicators consider the following: the goal of the communication; the audience; how 
to engage the audience to get them to care; what actions or words are needed to get the audience to care; and 
ways to connect with the audience about things the audience cares about. 5 Effective communicators successfully 
engage an audience by using logic, personal character, and passion simultaneously, often beginning with the 
audience’s perspectives in mind. This ability is especially important in crisis situations when followers and critics will look to leaders for a response. 5 The “first mover advantage” is a concept gleaned from Marine doctrine,5 
in which a communicator is able to define a crisis, his or her motives, and the next steps involved in a situation 
before any other party is able to intervene or interject. 
See Garcia’s Power of Communication5 for a complete description including impactful examples of utilizing this 
concept in communication. Briefly, in a crisis situation, silence and delay may make a problem worse. Action, 
however, is not just about speed; a “first mover” must have a “predisposition to make sound decisions quickly 
and communicate them effectively.”5(p81) In dangerous or rapidly evolving situations (eg, on the battlefield, in 
the emergency room), taking initiative in communication can lead to greater influence over others, because this 
initiative allows the speaker to define the issue, his or her motives, and actions. Often, the longer it takes to gain 
control the situation or communication, the harder it is to do so. 5 This concept can also be applied in less serious 
situations, such as in instances where allowing an issue to linger before addressing it (eg, poor performance of a 
subordinate, rumors spreading through a department) will weaken the leader’s ability to effectively manage the 
outcome and ultimately prevent him or her from providing support that followers need and upon which they rely. 
178
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Planning. Planning communication is not just about figuring out what to say, but also includes consideration 
for how others will react to what is said and how it is said, predicting and anticipating listeners’ expectations 
and meeting them, establishing goals, assigning resources, and imposing conditions. Something as simple as 
preparing for the setting in which the communication will take place (ie, the functional space) can make or break 
a communication.
In planning, do not overestimate the audience’s ability to pay attention; people see the world through their 
own frame and think they capture the world as it is, but they miss a lot. A communicator must first understand 
what frames are important to the audience (beyond demographics and concerns). This assessment is necessary 
to demonstrate that the speaker knows who the audience is and communicates understanding of the listeners’ 
perspective. The audience will feel well-regarded and deduce that the speaker has taken time to consider their 
alternative view. This consideration is especially true in stressful or emotional situations, whether leading a team 
in combat conditions or speaking to patients about their health. Individuals also experience “cognitive tunneling” 
or an inability to shift attention away from a threat, which impairs their ability to hear, listen, and remember 
effectively. Again, the Marine Corps is clear that the human factors are critical: “Our philosophy must not only 
accommodate but must exploit human traits.”4(p78) Therefore, the burden is on the communicator to ensure he 
or she is thoroughly considering the listener and planning for the communication.
 
1. Swift E. Field orders, messages and reports. J US Cavalry Assoc. 1897;Sep:221–228.
 
2. Corlett CH. Evolution of field orders. Coast Artillery J. 1925;62:502–513.
 
3. Hamlen A, Wells S, Di Desidero L. The Marine Corps University Communications Style Guide. 9th ed. Quantico, VA: Marine Corps University; 2016: 4. http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/usmc/mcu_comm_style_guide.pdf. Accessed 
September 28, 2018.
 
4. US Marine Corps. Warfighting. Quantico, VA: USMC; 1997. USMC Doctrine Publication 1. https://www.marines.mil/
Portals/59/Publications/MCDP%201%20Warfighting.pdf. Accessed September 28, 2018.
 
5. Garcia HF. Power of Communication, The Skills to Build Trust, Inspire Loyalty, and Lead Effectively. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: FT Press; 2012.
