105
The National Security Structure
Chapter 7
THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRUCTURE
JONATHAN WOODSON, MD*
INTRODUCTION
PROFESSIONALISM AND MILITARY VALUES
THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER AND THE NATIONAL SECURITY 
STRUCTURE
The National Command Authority and National Security Council
Congress and Oversight of the Department of Defense
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Organization of the Office of the Secretary of Defense
Combatant Commands
Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act 
Joint Chiefs of Staff and Joint Staff
Joint Doctrine
ORGANIZATION OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL SERVICES
Army Medical Department
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery
Air Force Medical Service
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY
Tricare
Multiservice Markets
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BUDGETING PROCESS
THE UNIFIED MEDICAL PROGRAM AND THE DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
*Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts; formerly, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs)
106
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
The military medical officer (MMO) is a unique 
professional who performs his or her duties in an 
increasingly complex environment. In order to be 
successful in both roles as a medical professional and 
a military officer, it is necessary for the MMO to have 
a comprehensive understanding of the organizational 
environment in which they will work, lead, and contribute to solving problems and advancing the tools 
of their profession. This chapter outlines key elements 
of the national security structure, including the national command authority, the Department of Defense, 
combatant commands, the military services, and the 
Defense Health Agency. In addition, the chapter provides an overview of budgeting and financial controls, 
which are important to the sustainability and success 
of the military medical mission.
PROFESSIONALISM AND MILITARY VALUES
The MMO is a member of two professions. A professional may be defined as a person who belongs to 
an occupational group that lives by an ethos, professional discipline, and set values, and that generates 
new knowledge to advance the profession, usually to 
the benefit of society. In turn, society generally grants 
the profession some autonomy and preferred status. 
Professionals begin with formal education, but progressive skill development and competence are the 
hallmarks of a professional.
Medical professionals are driven by compassion 
to heal and relieve suffering. In pursuit of these core 
values, they commit to putting the patient first, conducting research to improve the evidence base for care, 
and developing new strategies to broaden access and 
efficiency of care for all who may need services. In addition to providing treatment, medical professionals 
promote health and prevention of disease by counseling 
patients or sharing knowledge, which should benefit 
them as individuals. Although these are ideals, providers should constantly work to make them a reality. This 
is how providers maintain their respected status in the 
eyes of their fellow citizens and humanity.
The very essence of professionalism is a community 
of people who agree on standards and practice. A profession exercises some degree of autonomous control 
of the community because society recognizes the community has skills and knowledge that others, without 
professional education, do not generally understand. 
Therefore, the professional is bound by the standards 
of the profession. Although professionals may work 
to change some standards, while the standards are 
in force, professionals are bound by them. How the 
rules are made and who makes them are therefore 
critical aspects of professional knowledge. Healthcare 
professionals must be aware of standards of care, who 
their colleagues on the hospital staff are, and who 
controls the licensing and credentialing authority in 
their community.
The MMO is also a professional whose occupation 
is values based (see Chapter 3, Officership and the 
Profession of Arms in the 21st Century). Each of the 
military services expresses core values that officers 
are expected to embody and exhibit in their daily behavior. Deepening an understanding of these values 
throughout one’s professional career provides the 
platform for solid senior leadership roles. In fact, absent a deep understanding of core values, leaders are 
likely to fail. Loyalty and a commitment to upholding 
the Constitution (and its values) is an oath all MMOs 
make. The commitment to the Constitution is the basis 
for understanding the professional work of soldiers. 
The mission of defending the nation requires selflessness, just as does putting the patient first. Putting the 
”mission above self” is supported by a sense of duty 
or commitment to doing the job whenever and wherever required, doing it well, and improving skills and 
competence throughout one’s career. 
Military officers value honor. Closely related to 
honor is the value of integrity, an essential part of 
the character of a military officer, which is the reflex 
to do the right thing—even when no one is watching. Personal courage is a cornerstone attribute for 
the fully developed military officer. This attribute is 
clearly important in battle, but it needs to be honed 
to ensure leaders exhibit moral as well as physical 
courage whenever and wherever it is needed. Leaders 
frequently fail because they do not defend what is right 
or stand up to peers or others who foster climates of 
intimidation, disrespect, or discrimination.
The military services have a responsibility to develop leaders and promote good leadership. Leadership 
is the ability to establish a vision for a future that is 
better than today. It requires leaders to communicate, 
aspire, inspire, and motivate others. Leaders need to 
know how to build effective teams. Leadership is active 
and never passive. It requires energy and willingness 
to solve anticipated or unanticipated problems. Thus, 
leaders need to know themselves and know how to 
recharge and create balance in their lives. Leadership 
is the ultimate attribute that defines military officers 
because it incorporates the military ethos, defines 
107
The National Security Structure
competence, and is selfless and driven by mission. 
One aspect of leadership is resource development and 
utilization. Whether in a civilian medical system or the 
military, understanding the administration and management of the system is a key leadership qualification.
Careful evaluation of the ideal attributes of the 
medical professional and the military officer reveals 
that the optimal qualities of each profession are wholly 
congruent and mutually reinforcing. Individuals who 
do not fully understand the values underpinning the 
core attributes of a military officer question whether 
the medical ethos runs counter to the values of the military officer, which is clearly not true. Characteristics 
such as leadership, loyalty, duty, honor, and courage 
serve medical professionals and patient care very well. 
Understanding compassion and relief from suffering 
provides the military leader with mature skills needed 
to care for subordinates. MMOs therefore have a robust 
supportive framework to guide their development. 
True commitment to developing one’s self as a military 
officer pays dividends as a medical professional. Part 
of that commitment is understanding the framework 
of the military profession just as medical providers 
understand the framework of the medical profession.
THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER AND THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRUCTURE
The intent of this chapter is to lay the foundation 
for junior medical officers to understand the context 
in which they will function and mature as MMOs, and 
prepare them to assume increasing levels of responsibility and accountability throughout their careers. 
It charts a broad course for guiding personal development and provides a general introduction to the 
important elements of the national security structure 
impacting an MMO’s career. 
The MMO operates throughout his or her career 
within the special context of the US government’s 
national security structure in support of the National 
Security Strategy (NSS), National Defense Strategy 
(NDS), and National Military Strategy (NMS) (Exhibit 
7-1). The NMS1 increasingly calls for joint operations, 
and thus it is important for MMOs to understand the 
broad organizational structure of sister services and 
how each may contribute to joint operations, particularly during joint medical support to a spectrum of 
operations. This spectrum runs from conventional war 
to stabilization, post-conflict host nation support, and 
global health engagement.
EXHIBIT 7-1
DEFINITIONS
The National Security Strategy (NSS) is a document prepared periodically by the executive branch of the US government for Congress and other audiences. It outlines the major national security concerns of the United States and 
how the administration plans to deal with them. The legal foundation for the document is spelled out in the Goldwater-Nichols Act. The document is purposely general in content (contrast with the National Military Strategy 
[NMS]), and its implementation relies on elaborating guidance provided in supporting documents (including the 
NMS).
The National Defense Strategy (NDS), issued by the secretary of defense in response to the NSS, provides guidance 
for the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in developing the NMS, and also provides a foundation for the Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR). The NDS and the QDR provide strategic guidance from the secretary of defense on 
priority defense missions and associated strategic goals. These goals are used by the strategic planning community 
to assess newly emerging goals and to develop specific performance measures. The QDR report also serves as the 
Department of Defense’s strategic plan, consistent with the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993.
The National Military Strategy (NMS) is issued by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a deliverable to the 
secretary of defense that briefly outlines the strategic aims of the armed services. The chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, in consultation with the other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the commanders of the unified combatant commands, the Joint Staff, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense, prepares the NMS in accordance with 10 
USC, Section 153. Title 10 requires that not later than February 15 of each even-numbered year, the chairman must 
submit to the Senate Committee on Armed Services and the House Committee on Armed Services a comprehensive 
examination of the NMS. This report must delineate an NMS consistent with the most recent NSS prescribed by 
the president; the most recent annual report of the secretary of defense submitted to the president and Congress; 
and the most recent QDR conducted by the secretary of defense.
108
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
The 2015 NSS2 for the first time explicitly stated that 
“the spread of infectious diseases constitutes a growing 
risk” to national security. The strategy acknowledged 
the national security imperative behind the US government’s efforts in “leading a global effort to stop the 
deadly spread of the Ebola virus at its source.” The 
2015 NMS defines requirements to provide for globally integrated military operations across the spectrum 
of US military engagements, including maintaining a 
stabilizing presence, conducting stability operations, 
supporting civil-military authorities, and providing 
humanitarian and disaster response. Each of these 
functions has implications for employment of medical 
forces to accomplish the mission.
Increasingly, MMOs are required to participate in 
interagency work, either as part of international crisis response or policy development work groups, in 
pursuit of a “whole US government” organized effort. 
Thus, the MMO must have a broad understanding of 
the mission and capabilities of other important US 
government agencies and how the military “supports 
or is supported by” those agencies.
Medical care has become increasingly more complex in terms of technology, science, and organizational design. Medical care is a key enabler for the success 
of military operations and is an important reflection 
of national values and respect for human life. The expectations for the delivery of high quality care, good 
outcomes, and efficient systems that can be rapidly 
deployed anywhere in the world are the hallmark of 
distinction that defines the US military health system 
(MHS). As the world becomes more volatile and complex, the MHS must evolve and prepare its leaders to 
provide strategic leadership in this environment. 
The development of the military medical leader is 
iterative and must proceed in a parallel course with 
development of clinical skills. Neither attribute can be 
neglected if the MHS is to meet its mission and remain 
relevant. At senior levels of responsibility, the leadership ability of MMOs is actually more important than 
their clinical skills. Line officers, senior civilian officials, 
allies, and foreign governments will increasingly rely 
on MMOs’ ability to integrate the specific requirements 
of delivering medical care with geopolitical, logistical, 
and cultural concerns, and to evaluate the strategic 
impact of medical operations. 
The National Command Authority and National 
Security Council
The president is the commander-in-chief of the US 
armed forces. In exercising this responsibility, lawful 
orders need to be published. The national command 
authority refers to the source of lawful orders and 
comprises the president (and his or her designee, the 
vice president) and the secretary of defense (and his or 
her designee, the deputy secretary of defense). 
The National Security Act of 19473 established the 
White House National Security Council. It functions to 
advise and assist the president on national security and 
foreign policy issues and to coordinate these policies 
among government executive agencies. The standing 
(statutory) members of the National Security Council 
include the president (chair), vice president, secretary 
of state, secretary of defense, and secretary of energy. 
Regular invited attendees include the chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), the director of the National 
Intelligence Agency, and the director of national drug 
control policy. Other White House staff and executivelevel participants include the national security advisor, 
deputy national security advisor, homeland security 
advisor, attorney general, and White House chief of 
staff. 
Congress and Oversight of the Department of 
Defense
The Constitution of the United States provides 
for the legal authority to organize and fund military 
forces to defend the country. Article I, Section 8, gives 
Congress the authority “To lay and collect taxes . . . 
to pay the debts and provide for the common defense 
. . . To raise and support armies . . . To provide and 
maintain a navy.”4 
However, the organization of the armed forces dates 
to the Second Continental Congress, which established 
the US Army (June 14, 1775); the US Navy (October 13, 
1775); and the US Marine Corps (November 10, 1775). 
After the Revolutionary War, Congress established the 
Department of War (the predecessor of the Department 
of Defense [DoD]), on September 29, 1789. (Exhibit 
7-2 elaborates on the role of the Congress in shaping 
national defense policy and structures.)
The US Congress consists of the House of Representatives and the Senate. Each body of Congress 
exercises its oversight responsibilities through the 
organized activities of specific committees. In the 
House, the House Armed Services Committee is the 
duly constituted committee to conduct oversight of the 
DoD and the armed forces. This committee develops 
the legislation to authorize the DoD and each service 
to enact programs and personnel actions (eg, troop 
limits). The Subcommittee on Military Personnel is 
responsible for personnel policy, military healthcare, 
and military education, among other issues.
The Senate counterpart is the Senate Committee on 
the Armed Services, established under standing rules 
of the Senate. It has jurisdiction over the DoD, military 
services, and military research and development, 
as well as pay, promotion, and the selective service 
109
The National Security Structure
EXHIBIT 7-2
CONGRESS AND NATIONAL SECURITY REFORMS
The original War Department had responsibility of the naval forces as well as the land forces of the new nation, but 
after the Revolutionary War, the naval forces were almost nonexistent. In 1794 a separate executive department was 
established to build and oversee the naval forces; the new Navy and Marine Corps were managed separately from 
the Army, although efforts to collaborate were subsequently made during wartime. 
During World War II, substantial difficulties arose in establishing priorities for campaigns and operations, as well 
as resourcing the services, in part because of competition between the services, the relative independence of the 
services, and an unclear chain of command. Following the war, President Truman proposed establishing a unified 
Department of (National) Defense, bringing together the Department of War (Army) and the Department of the 
Navy. 
The National Security Act of 1947 created the “National Military Establishment” (renamed Department of Defense 
in 1949), and placed it under the authority, direction, and control of the secretary of defense. The National Security 
Act of 1947 also created the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the National Security Council, and the Central Intelligence Agency. 
Furthermore, the act established the US Air Force as a separate service from its predecessor, the Army Air Corps. 
During the second half of the 20th century, the structures within the services and Department of Defense changed 
several times, but the broad structure established in 1949 remains: four services within three departments under the 
overall direction of the secretary of defense. 
system. As in the House, the Senate Armed Services 
Subcommittee on Personnel is charged with leading 
most of the Senate’s defense oversight work in regard 
to active and reserve military personnel issues, including a focus on pay, military healthcare, education, 
morale and welfare, and military justice. 
Under Article 1, Section 9, Clause 7 of the Constitution, “No money shall be drawn from the treasury but 
in consequence of appropriation by law.” In both the 
House and the Senate, legislation that authorizes programs is separate from legislation that provides the appropriation or money to pay for the programs. Both are 
required in order to establish and sustain new programs. 
US military spending is the largest part of discretionary 
spending by the government. As a result, the Senate and 
House appropriations committees and their defense 
subcommittees play a crucial part in the defense budgeting process and acquiring needed resources to meet 
military and defense strategies. Using the combined 
authorization and appropriation authorities, Congress 
plays at least a partnership role and many times leads 
in efforts to reform national security structures. 
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
The DoD is an executive agency of the US government whose mission is to provide the military forces 
needed to deter, fight, and win the nation’s wars and 
to protect the security of the country (Figure 7-1). The 
DoD employs over 2. 8 million civilians, active duty 
military forces, reserve component forces, and contractors. Established after World War II as a distinct 
agency to supervise and coordinate national security 
and the armed forces, the DoD is headquartered at 
the Pentagon, in Arlington, Virginia, but has many 
offices throughout the National Capital Region and 
the United States.
The secretary of defense is a cabinet-level appointee 
who reports to the president and has authority, direction, 
and control over the DoD. The DoD has three component 
military departments: Department of the Army, Department of the Navy (and Marine Corps), and Department 
of the Air Force. In addition, the DoD has oversight for 
the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Defense Advanced 
Projects Agency, the National Security Agency, the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency, and the National 
Reconnaissance Office. Other DoD agencies include the 
Defense Logistics Agency, the Defense Health Agency 
(DHA), the Missile Defense Agency, the Defense Threat 
Reduction Agency, the Defense Security Agency, and the 
Pentagon Protection Force Agency. 
Organization of the Office of the Secretary of 
Defense
The secretary of defense provides civilian control 
over the military services in accordance with the Constitution. In order to execute these responsibilities, the 
Office of the Secretary of Defense is organized to provide a senior civilian staff to carry out the secretary of 
defense’s authorities and manage the DoD (Figure 7-2). 
110
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Secretary of Defense 
Department of Defense 
Department of 
the Air Force 
Secretary of the Air Force 
Office 
of the 
Secretary 
of the 
Air Force 
The
Air Staff 
The
Air Force 
Office of the Inspector General 
of the Department of Defense 
Joint Chiefs 
of Staff 
Chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff 
The
Joint Chiefs 
The 
Joint Staff 
Department of 
the Navy 
Secretary of the Navy 
Office 
of the 
Secretary 
of the 
Navy 
Office 
of the 
Chief 
of Naval 
Operations 
The
Navy 
Head- 
quarters 
Marine 
Corps 
The
Marine 
Corps 
Department of 
the Army 
Secretary of the Army 
Office 
of the 
Secretary 
of the 
Army 
The
Army Staff 
The
Army 
Defense Agencies (19)
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
Defense Commissary Agency 
Defense Contract Audit Agency 
Defense Contract Management Agency * 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Defense Health Agency* 
Defense Information Systems Agency * 
Defense Intelligence Agency * 
Defense Legal Services Agency 
Defense Logistics Agency * 
Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency 
Defense Security Cooperation Agency 
Defense Security Service 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency * 
Missile Defense Agency 
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency * 
National Reconnaissance Office 
National Security Agency/Central Security Service * 
Pentagon Force Protection Agency 
DoD Field Activities (8) 
Defense Media Activity 
Defense Technical Information Center 
Defense Technology Security Administration 
DoD Education Activity 
DoD Human Resources Activity 
DoD Test Resource Management Center 
Office of Economic Adjustment 
Washington Headquarters Services 
Combatant Commands (10)
US Africa Command
US Central Command
US Cyber Command
US European Command
US Indo-Pacific Command
US Northern Command
US Southern Command
US Special Operations Command 
US Strategic Command
US Transportation Command
DoD Component 
Senior Leader 
Military Service 
The overall organization of DoD is 
established in law in 10 USC §111
and in DoD Policy in DoDD 5100. 01. 
Office of the 
Secretary of Defense 
Deputy Secretary of 
Defense, Under 
Secretaries of 
Defense, Assistant 
Secretaries of 
Defense, and other 
specified officials 
•
Defense Agency Identified as a
Combat Support Agency (CSA)
DoD Organizational Structure 
Figure 7-1. Organization of the Department of Defense.
111
The National Security Structure
As of 7/16/2018 
OSD Oversight of Defense Agencies/DoD Field Activities
Defense Agencies * 19
DoD Field Activities
8
Total
27
Defense Agency
DoD Field Activity
Def. Agency & CSA
* Eight Defense Agencies are designated as Combat Support Agencies
(CSAs) with joint oversight by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
GC DoD
Defense
Legal
Services
Agency
(Est. 1981)
ATSD
(Public Affairs)
Defense
Media
Activity
(Est. 2008)
DoD CIO
Defense
Information
Systems
Agency *
(Est. 1960)
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Secretary of Defense
USD
(Intelligence)
Defense 
Intelligence 
Agency *
(Est. 1961)
Defense
Security
Service
(Est. 1972)
National
GeospatialIntelligence
Agency *
(Est. 1996)
National
Reconnaissance
Office
(Est. 1961)
National Security 
Agency /
Central Security 
Service *
(Est. 1952)
USD
(P&R)
Defense
Commissary
Agency
(Est. 1990)
DoD Human
Resources
Activity
(Est. 1996)
Defense
Health
Agency *
(Est. 2013)
DoD
Education
Activity
(Est. 1992)
USD
(Comptroller)
Defense
Contract
Audit
Agency
(Est. 1965)
Defense
Finance &
Accounting
Service
(Est. 1990)
USD
(Policy)
Defense
Security
Cooperation
Agency
(Est. 1971)
Defense
POW/MIA 
Accounting 
Agency
(Est. 2015)
Defense
Technology
Security
Administration
(Est. 2001)
CMO
Pentagon
Force
Protection
Agency
(Est. 2002)
Washington
Headquarters
Services
(Est. 1977)
USD
(R&E)
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects Agency
(Est. 1958)
Missile
Defense
Agency
(Est. 1984)
Defense
Technical
Information
Center
(Est. 2004)
DoD Test
Resource
Management
Center
(Est. 2004)
USD
(A&S)
Defense
Contract
Management
Agency *
(Est. 2000)
Defense
Logistics
Agency *
(Est. 1961)
Defense
Threat
Reduction
Agency *
(Est. 1998)
Office of
Economic
Adjustment
(Est. 1978)
Figure 7-2. Organization of the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
112
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
In addition to the secretary of defense, key civilian 
personnel (appointed by the president with the advice 
and consent of the Senate) include the deputy secretary 
of defense; three service secretaries (Army, Navy, Air 
Force); and six undersecretaries (for acquisition and 
sustainment [A&S]; research and engineering [R&E]; 
comptroller/chief financial officer; personnel and readiness [P&R]; policy; and intelligence). The National 
Defense Authorization Act of 2017 restructured the 
undersecretary for acquisition, technology, and logistics into two distinct roles: the undersecretary for 
research and engineering (chief technical officer), with 
the mission of advancing technology and innovation, 
and the undersecretary for acquisition and sustainment. A number of assistant secretaries, who are also 
civilian, support the undersecretaries. The assistant 
secretaries are also appointed by the president with 
the advice and consent of the Senate. Other key staff 
include the general counsel, deputy chief management officer, director of administration, and director 
of operational test and evaluation.
Space does not permit coverage of all of the roles 
and responsibilities of key leaders within the Office 
of the Secretary of Defense, which are delineated in 
several DoD publications. However, a few relationships, roles, and responsibilities are important for the 
medical officer to understand.
The military service secretaries function as the 
chief executive officers for their respective service and 
report to the secretary of defense. Reporting to the 
service secretaries are the service chiefs (ie, the chief of 
staff for the Army and the Air Force, the chief of naval 
operations for the Navy, and the commandant of the 
Marine Corps). With advice and consultation of the 
senior leadership of the service, the service secretaries 
are responsible for service plans, policies, budgets, and 
programs. They also have specified responsibilities 
under the Uniformed Code of Military Justice.
The undersecretary for personnel and readiness 
is the principal advisor to the secretary and deputy 
secretary of defense for total force management as it 
relates to personnel requirements, readiness, reserve 
component affairs, health affairs, training, equal opportunity, morale, welfare, and quality of life issues. 
The assistant secretary of defense for health affairs, 
while the principal advisor to secretary of defense for 
health-related matters, reports to the undersecretary 
for personnel and readiness.
The assistant secretary of defense for health affairs 
(ASD[HA]) has broad roles, responsibilities, and authorities as a principal agent of the Office of the Secretary 
of Defense. As delineated in DoD Directive 5136. 01:
The ASD(HA) is the principal advisor to the Secretary 
of Defense and the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Personnel and Readiness (USD (P&R)) for all DoD 
health and force health protection policies, programs, 
and activities, and for the Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES). The ASD(HA) ensures the effective execution of the DoD medical mission, providing 
and maintaining readiness for medical services and 
support to members of the Military Services, including during military operations; their families; those 
held in the control of the Military Services; and others 
entitled to or eligible for DoD medical care and benefits, including those under TRICARE. In carrying out 
these responsibilities, the ASD(HA) exercises authority, direction, and control over the DoD medical and 
dental personnel authorizations and policy, facilities, 
programs, funding, and other resources in the DoD. 5 
In the process of developing health-related policies, the ASD(HA) coordinates with the services and 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), usually with the service 
surgeons general and joint staff surgeons as the points 
of contact. Additionally, the ASD(HA) has authority, 
direction, and control over the Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, including the Armed 
Forces Radiobiology Research Institute, the Defense 
Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and 
Traumatic Brain Injury, and the Armed Services Blood 
Program. The ASD(HA) executes his or her responsibilities with the assistance of five functional leads:
 
1. The principal deputy assistant secretary of 
defense fulfills all of the functions and duties of the ASD(HA) when he or she is absent 
and provides direct oversight of the deputy 
assistant secretaries.
 
2. The deputy assistant secretary for health 
services policy and oversight serves as the 
principal staff assistant and advisor to the 
ASD(HA) for clinical policies and programs, 
including oversight of quality assessment/
quality improvement, patient safety, and 
population-based healthcare management 
across the MHS. 
 
3. The deputy assistant secretary of defense 
for health readiness policy and oversight 
directs development of deployment medicine 
and force health protection policy, medical research and development strategy and 
policy, international health agreements and 
policy, and domestic federal interagency and 
nongovernmental partnerships to serve DoD 
missions and medical readiness.
 
4. The deputy assistant secretary for health 
resources, management, and policy is responsible for overall financial policy and 
programs for the Defense Health Program 
(DHP). DHP is the name given to the actual 
113
The National Security Structure
budget groups that financially support the 
DHA, the MHS, and Tricare. The DHP maintains the financial portfolio that both funds 
and promotes the MHS’s strategic imperatives, including research, education, administration, health information technology, 
direct care in military hospitals and clinics, 
and payment for private sector healthcare.
 
5. The director of the DHA directs the execution 
of 10 joint shared services including Tricare, 
pharmaceuticals, health information technology, research and acquisition, education 
and training, public health, medical logistics, 
facility management, budget and resource 
management, and contracting. The DHA 
administers Tricare, which provides worldwide medical, dental, and pharmacy benefits 
to more than 9. 4 million uniformed service 
members, retirees, and their families.
Combatant Commands
Unified combatant commands (COCOMS) were 
created as an outgrowth of the Second World War and 
codified under the authorities of the National Security 
Act of 1947 and Title 10 of the US Code. During World 
War II, a unified command structure was created to 
synchronize American and British war efforts under 
the Combined Chiefs of Staffs, which planned and 
executed the military campaigns. The Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force for the European 
Theater was one example of a joint command structure. 
Following the war, unified commands underwent 
several iterations, originally overseen by one of the 
service chiefs as an executive agent of the JCS.
Unified COCOMs are 4-star joint commands organized on a geographical (area of responsibility) or 
functional basis and are constituted by forces from 
multiple military services. 6 COCOMs provide command and control of US military forces and conduct 
peacetime and wartime operations. They are established in accordance with the Unified Command Plan, 
a directive approved by the president that defines 
command relationships for operational forces globally. 
The military services, under Title 10 authorities and 
responsibilities, train, organize, and equip the armed 
forces. The services are responsible for providing 
trained forces to COCOMs when needed for ongoing operations. COCOMs are extremely important to 
providing strategic situational awareness, contingency 
planning, regional agility, unity of effort, and forward 
presence to support the NDS and NMS. Each of the 
COCOMs has an assigned command surgeon to provide healthcare and force health protection advice to 
the combatant commanders. 
The current geographical commands are the European Command (EUCOM, Stuttgart, Germany); Africa 
Command (AFRICOM, Stuttgart, Germany); Central 
Command (CENTCOM, MacDill Air Force Base, FL); 
Pacific Command (PACOM, Camp H.M. Smith, HI); 
Southern Command (SOUTHCOM, Doral, FL); and 
Northern Command (NORTHCOM, Peterson Air 
Force Base, CO). Figure 7-3 maps the geographic area 
of responsibility for each of these commands. 
Specified commands are functional in organization 
and operate across the globe. They have specialized, 
ongoing missions in support of unified commands 
and geographical combatant commanders. The US 
Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM, Scott 
AFB, IL); US Special Operations Command (USSOFigure 7-3. Map of the US unified geographic combatant commands.
114
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
COM, MacDill Air Force Base, FL); and US Strategic 
Command (USSTRATCOM, Offutt Air Force Base, 
NE) are the current specified commands. Congress 
recently directed the establishment of an additional 
functional combatant command, Cyber Command, 
which currently is organized under STRATCOM. 
Periodically different stakeholders have advocated 
for the establishment of a unified medical command 
as an additional functional command. The president, 
with the advice and assistance of the secretary of defense and CJCS, can establish additional specified or 
geographical commands as necessary.
Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act 
The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense 
Reorganization Act of 1986 defines the current military 
command relationships, roles, and responsibilities, 
specifically, the chain of command for the unified command that flows from the president through the secretary of defense to combatant commander. 7,8 The CJCS 
facilitates this line of authority but has no command 
authority over the COCOMs or the forces assigned. 
The Goldwater-Nichols Act produced significant 
changes in the command alignment and organization 
of the DoD. The intent of the legislation was to further 
address the interservice competition that impeded 
effective defense and military strategy planning 
and execution. Despite the creation of the DoD (in 
1947), when the services began reporting to a single 
secretary, the military services remained independent and organized along individual service chains 
of command. There remained duplication of effort 
(eg, procurement), lack of efficiency, and problems 
planning for and conducting combined arms/service 
operations. 
The Goldwater-Nichols Act clarified the role of the 
CJCS as the principal military advisor to the president, 
National Security Council, and secretary of defense. 
The act provided a platform for the CJCS to lead the 
development of the overall NMS, and it provided for 
clear command authority for unified and specified 
combatant commanders. The services report to their 
respective service chiefs and are responsible for “training, manning and equipping” the forces required or 
requested by the COCOM (subject to approval of the 
secretary of defense). The combatant commanders 
have full command of forces provided to them by the 
services, and they have freedom to plan and conduct 
joint operations with the assigned multiservice (air, 
ground, naval, and special operation) forces. In addition, the changes implemented under the GoldwaterNichols Act provided for unity of effort and efficiencies 
in procurement, interagency collaboration, and planning. The act also set forth the requirements for joint 
professional military education for career progression 
to admiral (flag) or general officer rank. MMOs have 
generally been exempted from this joint professional 
military education provision, although compliance 
with this requirement creates an increasingly competitive edge for individual medical officers.
Joint Chiefs of Staff and Joint Staff
The National Security Act of 1947, in part to institutionalize the joint chiefs structure created during 
World War II, constituted the JCS. Its membership 
includes the CJCS, vice chairman of the JCS, the service 
chiefs, and the chief of the National Guard Bureau. The 
JCS provides advice to the president, secretary of defense, and National Security Council through the CJCS 
(who is the designated principal military advisor) and 
assists the CJCS in carrying out his or her duties. The 
JCS, pursuant to the Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986, 
does not have operational command authority. Each 
service chief works for his or her respective service 
military department secretary.
The Joint Staff refers to the complement of civilians 
and military personnel (from all five armed services) 
who work to support and execute the responsibilities 
of the JCS and CJCS. In carrying out this effort, the 
Joint Staff coordinates extensively with the staff of 
the secretary of defense, staffs supporting the military 
service chief and secretaries, and staffs of combatant commanders and other government agencies as 
needed. Joint Staff functions follow a typical structure 
common in higher military headquarters, as noted in 
Figure 7-4, with the designation “J” before the numbered staff function. The director of the Joint Staff is a 
3-star general or flag officer responsible for oversight 
and coordination.
Like many headquarters, the Joint Staff has special 
staff officers assigned. The Joint Staff surgeon is assigned to the J-4 (logistics) cell and is the chief medical advisor to the CJCS and the COCOMs. The Joint 
Staff surgeon coordinates all issues related to health 
services, including operational medicine, force health 
protection, and readiness, working with the ASD(HA) 
and the military services. 
Joint Doctrine
The Joint Staff publishes a series of joint publications 
to educate US military forces in joint doctrine: 
Joint doctrine presents the fundamental principles 
that guide the employment of US military forces in 
115
The National Security Structure
Figure 7-4. Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
coordinated and integrated action toward a common 
objective. It promotes a common perspective from 
which to plan, train, and conduct military operations. 
It represents what is taught, believed, and advocated 
as what is right (ie, what works best). It provides distilled insights and wisdom gained from employing 
the military instrument of national power in operations to achieve national objectives. 6 
These publications range across the spectrum of 
staff operations, planning, and operational requirements for the joint force. Joint Publication 16 provides 
doctrine for unified action by US armed forces, including command relationships, military authority guidance for command and control, and organizing and 
equipping joint forces. It provides the doctrinal basis 
for interagency coordination and US military employment in multinational and interagency operations. It 
should be a familiar resource for all MMOs.
In 2015, the Joint Staff surgeon championed the development and approval of the Joint Concept for Health 
Services,9 which describes “the CJCS vision for what the 
future Joint Force will need to have from the collective 
military medical enterprise to support full spectrum 
global integrated Operations. This includes interoperable service capabilities, common standards, procedure, 
and tailorable expeditionary capability to operational 
and strategic requirements.” It provides a framework 
for joint healthcare for combatant commands, military 
services, the DHA, and the Joint Staff to achieve unity 
of effort in the provision of health service support.
Seven core supporting ideas are described in the 
Joint Concept for Health Services:
 
1. Integrated joint requirements in medical 
force development that mitigate threats to 
health services specifically, and the joint force 
generally, in contested environments.
 
2. Global synchronization of health services that 
plan, integrate, and sustain medical resources 
efficiently and quickly on a global scale. 
 
3. Modular and interoperable medical capabilities that meet a core set of joint standards 
and requirements while also conforming to 
service-specific requirements.
116
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
4. A global network of health service nodes that 
incorporate mission partners and are flexible 
enough to rapidly mobilize and deploy medical capabilities and resources.
 
5. Tailored medical forces and operations 
that reduce lift requirements, sustainment 
requirements, and physical presence while 
improving quality of care.
 
6. Leaders integrating joint medical capabilities 
who are adaptive, skilled, and can synchronize multiple efforts across multiple domains 
to ensure unity of health service efforts.
 
7. Improved performance through an appropriate balance between sustainment of current 
readiness through healthcare delivery in 
medical beneficiary markets, targeted warfighting clinical education and training, and 
investment in future capabilities.
ORGANIZATION OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL SERVICES
The Army, Navy, and Air Force operate independent medical services in support of their parent military organization. The Marine Corps receives medical 
support from the Department of the Navy. As a result, 
the chain of command flows from the service secretary 
to the respective service chief to the respective service 
surgeon general. The Army and Navy surgeons general both have command responsibilities in addition 
to their principal service senior staff roles. The Army 
surgeon general is commander of the US Army Medical 
Command. The Navy surgeon general is commander 
of the US Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
(BUMED). The Air Force surgeon general functions as 
the principal medical advisor to the chief of staff of the 
Air Force, but has no similar command responsibilities.
Army Medical Department
The Army Medical Department (AMEDD) is the 
oldest organized US military medical support activity and dates its lineage to the Continental Army in 
1775. The AMEDD is organized into six special officer 
corps and an enlisted medical corps. The Army Medical Corps (physicians) is the oldest corps and, like the 
AMEDD, dates to the Continental Army. The other 
corps are the Army Nurse Corps, the Dental Corps, the 
Veterinary Corps, the Medical Service Corps, and the 
Medical Specialist Corps. The Medical Service Corps 
represents a group of professional capabilities including pharmacists, medical evacuation pilots, operations 
officers, health administration officers, social workers, 
podiatrists, and several other disciplines. The Medical Specialist Corps consists of commissioned officers 
holding professional degrees who serve as clinicians 
in several disciplines such as physician assistants, 
physical and occupational therapists, and dieticians. 
There are 24 enlisted medical specialties (eg, behavioral health specialist, dental specialist) that augment 
the AMEDD’s professional capability. These specialists 
receive their training in a joint educational environment, the Medical Education and Training Campus, 
in San Antonio, Texas. The military standards are set 
and overseen by the AMEDD Academy of the Health 
Sciences, which educates and trains medical personnel 
as part of the AMEDD Center and School. The Center 
and School is also the proponent for Army medical 
organization, doctrine, and tactics.
The AMEDD executes its responsibility for staffing the services with qualified medical professionals 
through several educational strategies. Professionals 
such as doctors and nurses can receive primary professional training through civilian professional schools 
supported by scholarships (eg, the Health Professions 
Scholarship Program) or be directly commissioned into 
the service at later stages of their careers. 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
The BUMED is the Navy’s executive agency for 
training, staffing, and provision of health services 
and health policy for the Navy and Marine Corps. 
Commanded by the Navy surgeon general, BUMED 
has about 63,000 personnel assigned. BUMED’s subordinate commands are Navy Medicine East, Navy 
Medicine West, the Education and Training Command, the Naval Research Center, the Naval Medical 
Logistics Command, the Navy Medicine Information 
Systems Support Activity, and the Navy and Marine 
Corps Public Health Center. Navy Medicine East and 
Navy Medicine West have oversight of 19 hospitals 
and 9 clinics as well as 3 dental battalions.
Air Force Medical Service
The Air Force Medical Service (AFMS) was established in 1949, two years after the Army Air Corps 
became its own service as the US Air Force. Like its 
sister services, the AFMS is organized into a series 
of medical professional corps, including the Medical 
Corps, Nurse Corps, Biomedical Science Corps, Dental 
Corps, and Medical Service Corps. Additionally, there 
is an Enlisted Medics Corps. Unlike the Army and 
Navy, Air Force hospitals and clinics fall under the 
command of wing commanders rather than the AFMS.
117
The National Security Structure
Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences
The Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences (USUHS) and its F. Edward Hebert School of 
Medicine were established by an act of Congress on 
September 21, 1972. The mission of USUHS is “to educate, train and comprehensively prepare uniformed 
services health professionals, scientists and leaders to 
support the Military and Public Health Systems, the 
National Security and National Defense Strategies of 
the United States and the readiness of our uniformed 
services.” USUHS is a key source of career military 
medical physicians and graduate dental and nursing 
personnel. It is a joint organization, supporting all 
services. The ASD(HA), the three military surgeons 
general, and the US surgeon general are members (ex 
officio) of the USUHS Board of Regents.
DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY
Since 1947, there have been 19 studies, commissions, and reports to evaluate the propriety of having 
separate military service medical systems. The majority of these reports have recommended combining the 
medical services to improve efficiency, reduce costs, 
and reduce the size of medical headquarters. A few 
studies have recommended a “Joint Medical Command.” Most of these recommended changes have 
been resisted by the services.
In 2011, after a decade of war in which joint medical operations prevailed and costs spiraled, the Office of the Secretary of Defense formed a task force 
to review the long-term governance options of the 
MHS. Additionally, the 2005 Base Realignment and 
Closure Commission had recommended co-locating 
the Army, Navy, and Air Force medical headquarters 
in the same building. This set the stage for examining 
core duplicative health system functions that could be 
better managed as MHS shared services or enterprise 
support activities. The task force, conducted under the 
auspices of the undersecretary of defense (personnel 
and readiness) and the ASD(HA), produced a report 
recommending the establishment of a joint DHA to 
assume management of 10 shared business processes 
or core business activities and any other activities 
identified by the secretary of defense. The shared services included Tricare; health facilities management; 
budget and resource management; health information 
technology; medical logistics; education and training; 
research and development; pharmacies; public health; 
and procurement and contracting. The National Defense Authorization Act of 2017 directed the DHA 
to assume control of all military treatment facilities 
beginning October 1, 2018.
The overarching mission of the DHA is to support 
and maintain a medically ready force and a ready 
medical force at all times while creating a better, 
stronger, more efficient and agile MHS. The DHA assumed initial operating capability on October 1, 2013, 
and matured to full operating capability on October 
1, 2015. The DHA is also designated as a combat support agency and in this role is responsible to the CJCS 
for delivering key combat service support capabilities 
to support the NMS. The DHA is also responsible for 
oversight of National Capital Region medical assets, 
which include the Walter Reed National Military 
Medical Center in Bethesda, the Fort Belvoir Community Hospital, the National Museum of Health and 
Medicine, the Joint Pathology Center, the National 
Capital Region multiservice market (see below), and 
the Pentagon clinic. The DHA director, a 3-star admiral or general, reports directly to the ASD(HA). The 
ASD(HA) has authority, direction, and control over 
the DHA and DHP.
Tricare
When the DHA was established in 2013, it assumed 
control and oversight of the Tricare management activity functions, responsible for administering Tricare 
health benefits. Tricare is a congressionally defined 
health benefit service for active duty military personnel, their family members, retirees and their family 
members, reserve component service members, and 
eligible survivors of service members who died on 
active duty. 
DoD health benefits for dependents have undergone significant evolution over time, but their origins 
date to the passage of the Dependents Medical Care 
Act of 1956, which permitted the secretary of defense to 
contract with civilian healthcare providers to provide 
medical care for active duty military family members. 
Prior to this time healthcare for families of service 
members and retirees was provided on a “space available” status in military medical treatment facilities 
(MTFs). The expansion of the armed forces during the 
Cold War, the increase in employer-provided insurance, and the increased sub-specialization and remote 
locations of some military bases created access problems for military families, prompting Congress to act. 
In 1966 the act was updated and renamed the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed 
Services (CHAMPUS). At that time, the benefit for 
civilian healthcare was extended to retirees and their 
118
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
families. During the 1980s and 1990s, medical care 
throughout the United States experienced escalating 
costs. The CHAMPUS program was no exception. 
In the late 1980s, in an effort to control costs, improve access, and increase beneficiary satisfaction, 
a demonstration program known as the CHAMPUS 
Reform Initiative (CRI) was introduced in California 
and Hawaii. The CRI was the DoD’s first foray into 
a “managed care” model for managing the defense 
health benefit. It included a health maintenance organization (HMO) model of care delivery along with 
preferred provider organization (PPO) networks. 
Like in the civilian setting, the HMO option provided 
for primary care physician approved (“gatekeeper”) 
referrals to specialists, but with lower beneficiary cost 
contributions.
In 1994, through provisions in the DoD authorization and appropriations legislation, Congress required 
the nationwide implementation of the CRI model. Today’s Tricare program evolved out of this legislatively 
required reform, which established 12 Tricare regions 
in the country, serviced by 7 managed care support 
contracts. An additional overseas contractor was later 
added. Subsequent evolution and revisions of the managed care support contracts have reduced the number 
of contracts to two, divided into east and west regions 
(as of 2017). The independent overseas managed care 
support contract remains separately managed. 
The Tricare health benefit has been enhanced progressively over the years. In 2001, Congress directed 
the DoD to add Tricare for Life, a supplemental “wraparound” health insurance benefit for Medicare-eligible 
beneficiaries (mostly those aged 65 years and older). 
These beneficiaries must be eligible for Medicare Part 
A and enrolled in Part B. Tricare Reserve Select is an 
optional health benefit available to reserve component 
service members and their dependents. It gives access 
to the full Tricare options, but reserve component 
service members pay 28% of premium costs. Tricare 
Retired Reserve gives full access to Tricare health 
benefits to retired members of the reserve components, 
but the beneficiary pays 100% of the premium cost (no 
government cost sharing). Tricare Young Adult was 
created in response to the Patient Protection and Accountable Care Act or Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 
2010 (also known as “Obamacare”). The ACA allowed 
(along with other benefits) for young adults to stay on 
their parents’ health insurance plans up to the age of 
26 (under defined conditions). Tricare Young Adult 
created the same provisions within Tricare, but at additional premium costs equivalent to the actuarially 
projected cost for the coverage. Other enhancements 
of Tricare included dental and vision insurance and 
home delivery of pharmaceuticals.
In 2016, Congress again directed reforms of Tricare, aimed at simplifying the program as well as 
introducing modestly higher enrollment and user 
fees for military families and retirees. Tricare Select, 
which became effective January 1, 2018, replaced 
Tricare Extra (the PPO plan) and Tricare Standard 
(the fee-for-service plan). These benefits remain a 
subject of continuing congressional interest and will 
possibly change as American healthcare undergoes 
change. 
Multiservice Markets
The provision of comprehensive health service 
to military service members, family members, and 
retirees in the 21st century is complex and influenced 
by many of the driving forces promoting calls for 
reforms in the civilian health sector. The MHS has the 
additional responsibility of maintaining readiness of 
its medical forces. The MHS must balance costs, efficiency, productivity, quality of care, and utilization 
of medical services in the direct care system (MTFs) 
against expenditures, costs, access, and quality in the 
purchased care markets acquired through Tricare. Optimal utilization of the direct care system contributes to 
military medical force readiness, which is paramount. 
Additionally, new strategies to improve healthcare 
such as “value-based care” challenge the MHS organizational structure. MHS leaders increasingly view 
military communities with large beneficiary populations and large direct military healthcare capacity as 
providing the best opportunities to maintain clinical 
skills needed for the military mission. 
A multiservice market is a geographical region in 
which two or more military medical services operate 
(eg, the National Capital Region, where elements of 
Army, Navy/Marine Corps, and Air Force all operate 
MTFs). Uncoordinated, independent service efforts 
to optimize the use of their facilities and budgets 
can lead to competition between military services 
and overall suboptimized DoD health expenditures 
from the DHP. The multiservice market management 
structure provides for coordinated investments and 
medical services under a single market manager. Under this program, medical productivity is enhanced 
because the market manager has the ability to move 
(with consent of the parent military service) medical 
personnel (to create more capacity) and referrals (to 
improve access and productivity) to MTFs where 
needs exist. This in turn reduces the number of referrals to the private healthcare sector and reduces 
Tricare expenditures. 
In addition to the National Capital Region, large 
multiservice markets exist in the Tidewater region, 
119
The National Security Structure
Virginia; Colorado Springs, Colorado; San Antonio, 
Texas; Puget Sound region, Washington; and Oahu, 
Hawaii. The need to create an optimum enterprise 
management strategy in these large multiservice 
markets was one of the imperatives leading to the 
establishment of the DHA.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BUDGETING PROCESS
Mission, resources, and strategy are inseparably 
linked. It has been said that without resources, there 
is no mission, and strategy often needs to be changed 
to fit the resources available. This section refers specifically to financial resources because most other 
resources (personnel, equipment, and to some extent 
time) depend on the amount of money available to 
fund all requirements. It is important to emphasize 
that the DoD budget is tied to other national priorities 
and thus subject to the priorities set by the president 
and Congress. Under the provisions of the US Constitution, Congress has the ultimate responsibility for 
authorizing and appropriating the national budget, 
and specifically for providing the funds for the armed 
services and DoD. Thus, Congress is integral to the 
DoD budget process. 
The planning, programing, budgeting, and execution (PPBE) system is the DoD’s multiyear resource 
allocation process. 10 Phases of the PPBE process, 
which are distinct but overlapping (Figure 7-5), occur 
throughout the year, addressing both the current year 
budget execution and future year defense programs. 
The planning phase examines alternative strategies as 
well as changing conditions (including threats and economic and technology issues). The programing phase 
analyzes the resource implications of force structure, 
weapon systems, and other support elements as well 
as potential alternatives. The budgeting phase examines the first 1 to 2 years of the budget to justify and 
formalize execution and budget control. The execution 
phase results in funds distribution, year of execution 
budget assessment and adjustment, audit controls, and 
fiscal year closeout.
The NSS, NDS, and NMS, together with recommendations from the services, the CJCS, and the COCOMs, 
provide input to the secretary of defense’s planning 
guidance (DPG). The DPG is fiscally constrained guidance that establishes priorities for the DoD (modernFigure 7-5. The Department of Defense planning, programing, budgeting, and execution process. 
120
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
ization, readiness, forces structure, sustainability) and 
its support infrastructure and business processes. The 
DPG informs DoD components on capabilities needed 
to support the NSS, NDS, and NMS. From this guidance, the undersecretary of defense (comptroller), in 
coordination with the Office of Defense Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation, issues fiscal guidance, 
and DoD components develop proposed programs 
or program objective memoranda. Program objective 
memoranda are the result of systematic analysis of 
missions, objectives, resources, and alternatives. Based 
on fiscal guidance and program objective memoranda, 
a budget estimate submission is developed. The CJCS 
directs a chairman’s program assessment, which, 
along with the budget estimate, is further reviewed. 
Major budget conflicts that surface are resolved by 
the issuance of resource management decisions. This 
document informs the president’s budget through a 
process of communication and interaction with the 
Office of Management and Budget (during October 
through December). 
Following the submission of the president’s budget (which includes DoD requests) to Congress in 
early February of each year, Congress holds a series 
of engagements and hearings to clarify the DoD’s fiscal concerns and requests. Based upon independent 
congressional assessment, Congress may (and often 
does) modify the requested budget. The Senate and 
House adjudicate differences in their recommended 
budgets through a conference committee process before approving it and sending it back to the president 
to sign. Ideally, this process is completed before the 
coming fiscal year (which begins October 1). In recent 
years, federal budget negotiations have often remained 
unresolved by October 1, and the government is 
funded through a series of continuing resolutions, or 
shut down, until Congress reaches an agreement approved by the president. 
THE UNIFIED MEDICAL PROGRAM AND THE DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM
The DoD’s medical mission is to support the nation’s 
defense by providing health services support. This is 
a key enabler for combat and other operations. The 
overall budget for defense health is captured in four 
separate budget lines: the DHP operation and maintenance (O&M) appropriation; military medical personnel; military medical construction; and the MedicareEligible Retiree Health Care Fund. When these four 
types of costs are added together, the combined budget 
is referred to as the Unified Medical Program.
DHP O&M funds provide for worldwide medical 
and dental services to active forces and other eligible 
beneficiaries for care delivered in military hospitals 
and clinics as well as civilian care delivered through 
Tricare. The DHP also provides funds for medical 
headquarters, veterinary services, and occupational 
and industrial healthcare. Military medical personnel 
costs are funded through the military departments 
with all other military personnel costs, but medical 
personnel costs are identified for accounting purposes. Similarly, military medical construction costs 
are funded along with other military construction, 
but medical construction is specifically identified and 
funded as a distinct line item. 
The Medicare Eligible Retiree Health Care Fund is 
an accrual fund administered by the secretary of the 
treasury that finances, on an actuarially sound basis, 
future liabilities of the Tricare For Life benefit (dualeligible, DoD, and Medicare beneficiaries). The DoD 
makes annual contributions to this fund according to 
a formula determined by an independent board of 
actuaries.
The escalating costs of the MHS throughout the 
1980s and 1990s was fueled by many factors. Many 
issues were similar to those that plagued the private 
sector and included expansion of subspecialty medical care, an aging population, enhanced use of medical technology and health information technology, 
and increased costs for pharmaceuticals, facilities, 
and personnel. For the DoD, rising healthcare costs 
were exacerbated by an expansion of health benefits, 
which were largely borne by the DoD, while beneficiary out-of-pocket costs were reduced (the opposite 
trend of what was unfolding in the private sector). 
Military healthcare budgets became harder to predict 
and manage. Shortfalls in year-of-execution budgets 
to provide medical care for beneficiaries through 
the DHP required reprogramming of funds from the 
military services’ O&M accounts. 
Congress established the DHP in 1991 to provide a 
stronger financial management structure. The DHP 
is a separate budget appropriation from the military 
services under the authority, direction, and control 
of the ASD(HA). Budget activity groups, often called 
BAGs (eg, for MTFs and private sector care or Tricare) 
within the DHP allow for greater insight into accelerated growth in costs. However, the establishment of 
the DHP in and of itself did not produce better cost 
control. From 2001 to 2011 the DHP budget more than 
doubled, from $19 billion to $54 billion. Most of the 
increase in costs were in the budget activity groups 
associated with payment of healthcare for beneficiaries (during this period, several new programs such 
as Tricare for Life were added). 
121
The National Security Structure
The DHP’s budgeting process follows the PPBE 
process. It is important to note that the DHP, while a 
separate appropriation within the DoD budget, contributes to the DoD’s overall budget request. When 
the total DoD budget is constrained, as it was by the 
Budget Control Act of 2011, which imposed mandatory 
ceilings and reductions, unrestrained growth in the 
DHP produces critical fiscal issues for the DoD. The 
rise in costs of the DHP competes with the military 
services’ funds to train, staff, equip, and modernize 
the forces. This situation emphasizes the need for fiscal 
accountability, efficiency, and innovation within the 
DHP and MHS to support the overarching strategic 
objectives and mission of the DoD.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
The MMO has a unique profession. MMOs are 
members of both the medical and military professions, 
with mutually reinforcing ethos. The critical nature 
of their work, the importance of the mission, and the 
contribution of their profession to society mandate 
the requirement for disciplined improvement in skill 
and competency.
The world in general and medical care specifically 
are becoming more complex. New technologies and 
digitization are driving rapidly evolving ways of 
delivering healthcare. From the micro level (cellular, 
genomics, proteomics, nanotechnology) to the macro 
level (robotics, internet of medical things), advancing 
information is creating new possibilities for personalizing care. The adaption of these technologies to 
benefit service members and other MHS beneficiaries 
is the province of the MMO. Senior leaders will need 
to determine how to invest critical resources and leverage new technologies to drive the MHS to greater 
efficiency.
In addition, technology and digitization are rapidly 
changing warfare. Non-state actors can now extend 
their reach and influence in ways and magnitudes 
unimagined a few decades ago. These changes are 
producing challenges for military medicine as they 
are for other aspects of the defense establishment (eg, 
cyber security).
The first decade of the 21st century saw the United 
States involved in a two-theater war of mixed conventional and unconventional varieties. The second decade brought a proliferation of individual terrorist acts 
around the world and the resurgence of competition 
from old adversaries such as Russia and China. The 
MHS performed well throughout this fluid warfare 
environment, but it must remain ready to engage in the 
full spectrum of operations that may be required of US 
armed forces. These may include rapid deployments 
to deter and defeat enemies, as well as postconflict 
stability and nation-building operations. To be sure, 
the MHS will be globally engaged, requiring its officers to develop a set of professional competencies 
commensurate with the evolving challenges. 
Combined arms, joint, and multinational coalition 
operations are likely to prevail. In fact, many nations 
will look to the US military to provide full spectrum 
medical deployment platforms, which can support 
their niche capabilities (see Chapter 13, Combined 
Health Services Support Operations). The MHS must 
work to continually improve the Joint Trauma System, 
which has matured and served the operational force 
well during the past 2 decades. This system, based 
upon rapid-cycle analysis of data and implemented 
change, has saved lives. As the variety and sources of 
data increase, leaders must use information management systems effectively and develop analytic tools 
to drive decision-making and needed changes. At 
the same time, the MHS must lead efforts to produce 
higher levels of medical readiness and force health 
protection. Force health protection, anchored in public 
health strategies, has been the foundation of military 
medicine since the Revolutionary War. In fact, force 
health protection initiatives have saved more lives and 
returned more soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines to 
the fight than more advanced technology. The MMO’s 
career is exciting but challenging, and requires great 
personal commitment to career development. This has 
been the heritage and will be the future of US medical 
officers.
REFERENCES
 
1. Joint Chiefs of Staff. The National Military Strategy of the United States of America, 2015. Washington, DC: JCS; June 2015. 
www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Publications/2015_National_Military_Strategy.pdf. Accessed October 23, 2017.
 
2. National Security Strategy. Washington, DC: The White House, February 2015. Obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/
default/files/docs/2015_national_security_strategy.pdf. Accessed October 23, 2017.
 
3. The National Security Act of 1947, amended by Pub L no. 115-31 (May 5, 2017).
122
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
4. US Constitution, art 1, sec 8.
 
5. US Department of Defense. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD[HA]). Washington, DC: DoD; September 30, 2013. DoD Directive 5136. 01. http://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/dodd/513601p.
pdf?ver=2017-08-10-151523-060. Accessed October 23, 2017.
 
6. US Department of Defense. Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States. Washington, DC: DoD; May 31, 2013. Joint 
Publication 1. www.dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp1.pdf. Accessed October 23, 2017.
 
7. The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986. Pub L no. 99-433. www.history.defense.
gov/Portals/70/Documents/dod_reforms/Goldwater-Nichols.
 
8. Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint Concept of Health Services (JCHS). Washington, DC: JCS; August 31, 2015. http://dtic.mil/
doctrine/concepts/joint_concepts/joint_concept_health_services.pdf. Accessed October 23, 2017.
 
9. US Department of Defense. The Planning, Programing, Budgeting and Execution Process. Washington, DC: DoD; January 25, 
2013, incorporating change 1, August 29, 2017. DoD Directive 7045. 14. http://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/
DD/issuances/dodd/704514p.pdf?ver=2017-08-29-132032-353. Accessed October 24, 2017.
 10. US Department of Defense. Health Service Support. Washington, DC: DoD; July 26, 2012. Joint Publication 4-02. www.
dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp4_02.pdf. Accessed October 23, 2017.
