285
Physical Fitness: The Necessary Foundation
Chapter 20
PHYSICAL FITNESS: THE NECESSARY 
FOUNDATION
BRIAN R. KUPCHAK, PhD*; DANA R. NGUYEN, MD†; and MARK B. STEPHENS, MD‡
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
HISTORY OF MILITARY PHYSICAL FITNESS
BENEFITS OF PHYSICAL FITNESS
KEY CONCEPTS
Components of Physical Fitness
Plyometrics
Physical Readiness/Fitness Tests
Overtraining
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Pregnancy and Postpartum Physical Fitness
Aging
Wounded, Injured, and Ill Service Members
PHYSICAL FITNESS AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Role of the Military Medical Officer 
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
RESOURCES 
SUMMARY
*Lieutenant, Medical Service Corps, US Navy; Assistant Professor, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
†Lieutenant Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army; Assistant Professor, Department of Family Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
‡Captain (Retired), US Navy; Professor of Family and Community Medicine, Penn State University, State College, Pennsylvania
286
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
“Physical fitness is the basis for all other forms of excellence.”1
—President John F. Kennedy
INTRODUCTION
Operating in today’s services requires exceptional 
stamina and physical readiness. Service members 
must be prepared to travel to a variety of environments on short notice and immediately conduct hightempo and high-intensity operations. Success in this 
arena requires constant vigilance among individual 
units and commands to maintain the highest levels of 
physical fitness among service members to successfully execute missions. Current military directives 
emphasize total force fitness (TFF), a holistic approach 
encompassing all domains of the individual, as defined in the 2011 guidance issued by the chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCSI 3405. 01). 2 The TFF 
instruction directs the services to approach readiness and force preservation through eight domains 
(discussed in Chapter 19, The Evolution of Human 
Performance Optimization and Total Force Fitness)—physical, nutritional, medical, environmental, 
spiritual, psychological, social, and behavioral—all 
of which are critical for ensuring service members 
have the requisite knowledge, skills, and abilities 
to perform optimally with maximal resilience. 3 This 
chapter will examine the physical domain by presenting definitions and a historical background, followed 
by the physiologic principles and benefits of exercise, 
the foundational elements of physical fitness, and 
the vulnerabilities faced in efforts to maintain a fit 
fighting force.
DEFINITIONS
 
• Balance. Ability to control or stabilize the 
body when standing still or moving.
 
• Cardiorespiratory fitness. Efficiency with 
which the body delivers oxygen and nutrients 
needed for muscular activity and transports 
waste products from the cells. 
 
 
Activities to build aerobic capacity: Jogging/running, cycling, climbing, rowing, using the lateral 
trainer, using the upper-body ergometer, vigorous 
dance, kickboxing, aerobics, jumping rope, swimming, cross country skiing, inline skating.
 
• Coordination. Ability to move two or more 
body parts under control, smoothly and efficiently, to achieve a designated purpose.
 
• Exercise prescription. Specific plans of fitnessrelated activities designed for a specified 
purpose. 
 
• Flexibility. Ability to move the joints (eg, 
elbow, knee) or any group of joints through 
an entire normal range of motion.
 
 
Activities to build flexibility and mobility: stretching machines, freestyle stretches (or with straps), 
yoga and Pilates.
 
• Functional fitness. Exercises that train muscles to work together and prepare them for 
daily tasks by simulating common movements 
done at home, at work, or during combat. 
 
• Intensity. Level of effort during exercise, 
from low to high. Increasing intensity allows 
one to improve a particular component of 
training.
 
• Maximal aerobic power. The highest level of 
oxygen that a person can utilize, called the 
Vo2max, and reported as mL/kg/min. With improved levels of aerobic fitness, individuals 
can improve both their sustainable maximum 
heart rate and their Vo2max.
 
• Overload. Setting the intensity of the exercise 
higher than normal to produce physiological 
adaptations.
 
• Periodization. Systematic planning of training 
to maximize/optimize performance of a mission or competition at a known point in the 
future.
 
• Progression. Gradually and consistently escalating a training stimulus to build aerobic 
capacity, strength, endurance, and mobility.
 
• Recovery. Providing adequate rest period 
between exercise sessions to achieve optimal 
performance, particularly when working on 
strength or endurance. Usually accomplished 
by alternating fitness components or muscle 
groups from one day to the next.
 
• Specificity. Tailoring the training stimulus to 
achieve a desired outcome, such as training 
and practice for physical tasks that service 
members will be required to perform as part 
of their duties.
 
• Strength training. Incorporates muscular 
strength and muscular endurance.
 
◦ 
Muscular strength. Amount of force a muscle 
or muscle group can exert in a single effort.
287
Physical Fitness: The Necessary Foundation
 
◦ 
Muscular endurance. Ability of a muscle 
or muscle group to perform repeated 
movements with a submaximal force for 
extended periods of time.
 
 
Activities to build strength and endurance: 
working out with free weights, plate-loaded 
machines, kettle bells, medicine balls, resistance bands/tubing, or suspension straps; 
doing calisthenics with body weight resistance.
 
• Volume. Combination of the number of sets 
and repetitions performed in a workout.
HISTORY OF MILITARY PHYSICAL FITNESS
“Nations have passed away and left no trace, and history gives the naked cause of it—one single simple reason 
in all cases; they fell because their people were not fit.”4
 
—Rudyard Kipling
Throughout the course of human history, leaders 
have recognized that physical fitness has paralleled the 
rise and fall of empires. From individuals to societies, 
physical fitness is a key predictor of the success of nations. The Greeks (2,500–200 BCE) embraced physical 
perfection as an outward expression of health and 
fitness. The Romans (200 BCE–476 CE) required men 
to participate in running, marching, jumping, and 
throwing. In contrast, during the Middle Ages a relative return to the agrarian lifestyle ensued. Physical 
work in the field was associated with general gains in 
fitness on a societal level, whereas traditional knightly 
acts included shooting (bows), swimming, climbing, 
horsemanship, fighting (mounted and dismounted), 
and socializing. From then on, a cyclical history of 
physical fitness and military success began—an onset 
of war inspired increased physical fitness efforts, which 
lapsed after the war ended. 
The role of physical fitness in the US military follows an annual course cycle, with tests in the spring 
and fall. Early colonial militias were typically selected 
based on their enthusiasm, strength, and reliability. In 
general, colonial Americans were a largely agrarian 
society with an active physical lifestyle and commensurate levels of fitness. However, by the early 20th 
century, the urbanization of American society had 
shifted work from agriculture to factories and offices, 
resulting in a population that had become significantly 
less active. In 1912, Woodrow Wilson recognized the 
value of physical fitness in military performance, and 
during his tenure as president, the US Army Manual 
of Physical Training was developed. 5 The principles of 
this first edition were to (a) develop general health and 
vigor; (b) promote muscular strength and endurance; 
(c) enhance self-reliance; and (d) improve intellect, 
activity, and precision. 
In 1917, when the United States enacted the Selective Service Act, roughly one-third of all recruits were 
found to be unfit to fight. Therefore, governmental 
legislation was enacted to improve physical education within public schools in an effort to improve 
“readiness” for the US military. During World War I, 
the United States undertook physical assessment of 
recruits using the standards of modern medicine for 
the first time. However, one-third of the men continued 
to be rejected for service due to being physically unfit 
throughout the war. 6
As the United States prepared to enter World War 
II, fitness standards intended to enhance screening for 
military service were introduced. The standards were 
used to identify individuals who needed remedial 
fitness work. About half of the first 2 million service 
members conscripted through the Selective Service 
were deemed physically unfit. Over the course of 
the war, 30% percent of draftees were rejected, most 
for medical issues related to poor physical fitness. 
Performance requirements and standards were established both for the individual services and for many 
military operational specialties, including aviation 
programs (US Army Field Manual [FM] 21-20, Basic 
Field Manual, Physical Training [1941]; US Marine 
Combat Conditioning [1942]; Physical Fitness Manual 
for the US Navy [1943]). 7–9 
Attention to civilian fitness levels also increased 
over the course of the war. The National Committee on 
Physical Fitness was created in 1943, and the US “Victory Corps,” featuring a series of exercises specifically 
designed to promote strength, stamina, endurance, 
and physical skills, was incorporated into high-school 
curricula. The War Department pamphlet Physical 
Conditioning (PAM 21-9), published in 1944, defined 
total military fitness as a composite of:
 
1. Technical fitness, evidenced by tactical training and a knowledge and skill in the use of 
arms and equipment. 
 
2. Mental and emotional fitness (more commonly known as morale), characterized by: 
 
a. Habits of thinking and feeling which 
will permit alertness with an economy 
of energy and rapid relaxation when 
opportunity is afforded to do so; 
288
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
 
b. A sense of mission, or identification with 
a cause of great significance shared with 
others; and 
 
c. A will to fight.
 3. Physical fitness, evidenced by a body which 
can retain normal responses to stimuli in the 
face of fatigue and exhaustion, and continue 
to function effectively under the physical 
stresses placed upon it by the routine and 
emergency tasks of war. 10
Colonel Leonard G. Rowntree, medical director of 
the Selective Service during World War II, defined 
combat-related fitness as the ability to combine power 
and efficiency with minimal recovery periods in activities that required strength, stamina, agility, endurance, 
emotional stability, leadership, and a refusal to lose. 11 
In 1946, War Department PAM 21-910 was revised 
and became Army FM 21-20. 12 It defined the principles 
of exercise training in terms of progression and overload, and also identified functional exercises to develop 
strength, muscular endurance, anaerobic and aerobic 
capacity, agility, and coordination (Exhibit 20-1), as 
well as attainment of “proficiency in certain military 
physical skills which are essential to personal safety 
and effective combat performance.”13 The Army generally enacted these official fitness initiatives. Although 
the other services often followed suit, they tended to 
make duty-specific modifications and only rarely formulated written policies for the entire service.
The entry of the United States into the wars in Korea and Vietnam shifted the focus of military fitness 
requirements yet again. In 1958 the Army Physical 
Fitness Service opened at Fort Benning, Georgia, to 
give physical fitness the same level of importance as 
technical skill development. In 1962, the principles of 
balance, variety, and regularity were introduced into 
military physical training. A 1970 physical fitness 
symposium at Fort Benning added aerobic activity as 
a central component and recommended that trained 
fitness personnel implement physical training programs. 14 FM 21-20 was revised again in 1973 to define 
fitness as a “healthy body with the capacity for skillful, sustained performance, ability to recover quickly 
after exertion, a desire to complete the mission, and 
confidence to face any eventuality.”15
FM 21-20 was again revised again in the 1980s 
to introduce the three-activity physical fitness test: 
a 2-mile run (aerobic endurance), plus sit-ups and 
push-ups (muscular endurance). 16 In 1981, Department 
of Defense (DoD) Directive 1308. 1 was published,17 
stipulating further that physical fitness training activities should enhance both combat readiness and unit 
cohesion, and that personnel trained in fitness methods must plan and supervise the programs according 
to uniform methods and standards for performance 
and weight control. As the United States shifted to an 
all-volunteer force after the end of the Vietnam War, 
civilian fitness experts began to take military metrics 
as their model. In 1998, an American College of Sports 
Medicine position statement used military readiness 
standards to establish exercise minimums for health 
and fitness in the civilian population. 18 
The eighth revision of FM 21-20 (1985) had shifted 
focus from combat readiness to health-related fitness, 
and troops began to focus on fitness test scores rather 
than combat performance. 16 However, once active 
military engagement increased in the early 1990s, 
Army Regulation 350-41, published in 1993, shifted 
the focus back to combat readiness, emphasizing nine 
elements of fitness: (1) cardiorespiratory endurance, 
(2) muscular strength and endurance, (3) anaerobic 
conditioning, (4) flexibility, (5) body composition, (6) 
competitive spirit, (7) self-discipline, (8) ability to cope 
with psychological stressors, and (9) healthy lifestyle 
choices. 19 In summary, although the components of 
military physical fitness have changed over time, 
battlefield conditions have always imposed strenuous 
demands even on physically fit, resilient combatants. 
As conditions of future engagements unfold, physical 
fitness will remain a significant factor in individual, 
unit, and force readiness. 
BENEFITS OF PHYSICAL FITNESS
The demands of modern warfare require physically 
fit combatants: they must be able to train consistently 
even when not actively engaged in warfighting; demonstrate reliable performance in missions; manage the 
stressors presented during conflict; and endure the 
longer-term consequences for mental and physical 
health. 20 Meeting these standards has important benefits beyond the immediate. The fit service member is 
less likely to miss days due to musculoskeletal injury 
or illness and will reap significant psychological benefits. 18 Physically fit service members have been shown 
to have better mental health, more positive outlooks, 
greater happiness, and greater ability to withstand 
stressful environments. 21,22
Evidence strongly suggests that both all-cause 
mortality and many chronic disease rates decrease 
as physical activity increases. 23–26 The psychological 
benefits of fitness and exercise in decreasing stress 
and modifying the symptoms of stress-related illnesses are also well established. 27 A Cochrane review 
289
Physical Fitness: The Necessary Foundation
of research on depression shows that exercise is moderately more effective than a control intervention for 
reducing symptoms of the disease. 28 There has also 
been strong evidence regarding the benefits of lowering anxiety levels via exercise. 29,30 Perhaps of most 
significance to healthy military individuals, attaining 
higher levels of physical fitness confers higher levels 
of well-being and decreases reactivity to psychosocial 
stressors. 31,32
Recent research suggests that physical fitness has 
important consequences for resilience—a key characteristic of the effective combatant. Resilience reinforces 
higher levels of both mental and physical function in 
stressful situations, and supports more effective recovery after the initial stressors are removed. Several 
literature reviews have demonstrated that aerobic exercise has positive effects on self-efficacy, self-esteem, 
and mental toughness—physically fit individuals 
demonstrate higher levels of resilience than those who 
are unfit. 33–35 
Because higher levels of physical and mental resilience contribute to improved unit cohesion as well as 
higher levels of individual and unit confidence, these 
relationships have significance for military units as 
well as individuals. Unit fitness schedules should 
alternate endurance-activity days with strength- or 
mobility-training days to ensure a training frequency 
that enables units to improve and sustain individual 
aerobic capacity without increasing the risk of overuse injuries.
The service member who exhibits a high level of 
aerobic fitness can also perform activities at intensity levels lower than his or her maximum ability 
for longer periods of time than those less fit. This 
type of fitness is especially beneficial during long 
tactical marches, loading and unloading trucks, 
preparing fighting positions, maneuvering at high 
altitudes (>15,000 ft), and land navigation over 
a prolonged time period. Thus, individuals with 
greater aerobic fitness can perform tasks at a higher 
intensity levels and are less likely to succumb to 
fatigue. They are also able to recover faster and to 
move more quickly to the next task at hand. Specific 
physiologic benefits of endurance/aerobic training 
are listed in Exhibit 20-2. 
Strength and power are critical components for the 
functional fitness of service members. Most military 
occupational specialties require heavy physical lifting. Many service members repetitively lift heavy 
machine parts, weapons, or combat gear while performing their daily duties. The US Department of 
Labor rates over half of Army military occupational 
specialties as entailing “very heavy” lifting, which 
means that they require the capacity to lift 50 pounds 
frequently and 100 pounds occasionally (Technical 
Bulletin 592). 36 The demands these tasks impose on 
today’s soldiers warrant careful attention to both 
strength and power training to optimize both safety 
and performance in performing combat-specific tasks. 
Load-bearing tasks in particular can put significant 
physical stress on the individuals who perform them. 
Fortunately, resistance training has been shown 
to improve both physical-readiness testing and 
performance of load-bearing maneuvers. 37 Specific 
physiologic benefits of resistance training are listed 
in Exhibit 20-3. 
EXHIBIT 20-1
ARMY TRAINING PRINCIPLES DURING THE 1950s 
 
• Running. Distance and sprint running on road and cross country.
 
• Jumping. Broad jumping and vertical jumping downward from a height.
 
• Dodging. Change of body direction rapidly while running.
 
• Climbing and traversing. Vertical climbing of rope, poles, walls, and cargo nets. Traversing 
horizontal objects such as ropes, pipes, and ladders.
 
• Crawling. High crawl and low crawl for speed and stealth.
 
• Throwing. Propelling objects such as grenades for distance and accuracy.
 
• Vaulting. Surmounting low objects such as fences and barriers by use of hand assists.
 
• Carrying. Carrying objects and employment of man carries.
 
• Balancing. Maintaining proper body balance on narrow walkways and at heights above normal.
 
• Falling. Contact with the ground from standing, running, and jumping postures.
 
• Swimming (in specialized situations). Employment of water survival techniques.
Data source: US Department of the Army. Physical Training. Washington, DC: DA; 1950. Field Manual 21-20.
290
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
EXHIBIT 20-2
BENEFITS OF ENDURANCE TRAINING 
 
• Increased stamina due to central and peripheral adaptions. 
 
• Lower respiration (minute ventilation) at a given submaximal intensity.
 
• Lower heart oxygen cost for a given absolute submaximal intensity.
 
• Lower heart rate and blood pressure at a given submaximal intensity.
 
• Lower risk of injury.
 
• Increased blood supply (capillary density) in skeletal muscle.
 
• Increased maximum work capacity and power output.
 
• Increased capacity for prolonged work.
 
• Increased serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and decreased serum triglycerides.
 
• Reduced total body and intraabdominal fat.
 
• Reduced insulin needs; improved glucose tolerance.
 
• Heat acclimation. 
Data sources: (1) Franklin B, ed. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins; 2000. (2) American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM Fitness Book. 3rd ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2003. (3) 
Myers J. Exercise and cardiovascular health. Circulation. 2003;107(1):e2–e5. 
EXHIBIT 20-3
BENEFITS OF RESISTANCE TRAINING
• Increased muscle strength. 
• Increased size of muscle fibers. 
• Increased speed with movement. 
• Improved anaerobic capacity.
• Increased bone strength. 
• Increased bone mass and mineral density.
• Increased size and strength of tendons, ligaments, and fascia. 
• Increased work capacity and power output.
• Decreased muscle soreness from heavy work. 
Data sources: (1) Baechle TR, Earle RW. Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2000. (2) 
Conroy BP, Kraemer WJ, Maresh CM, Dalsky GP. Adaptive responses of bone to physical activity. Med Exerc Nutr Health. 1992;1:64–74. 
(3) Hather BM, Tesch PA, Buchanan P, Dudley GA. Influence of eccentric actions on skeletal muscle adaptations to resistance training. Acta Physiol Scand. 1991;143(2):177–185. (4) Kraemer WJ, Mazzetti SA, Nindl BC, et al. Effect of resistance training on women’s 
strength/power and occupational performances. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33(6):1011–1025. (5) Sale DG. Neural adaptation to resistance training. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1988;20(5 Suppl):S135–S145. (6) Staron RS, Leonardi MJ, Karapondo DL, et al. Strength and 
skeletal muscle adaptations in heavy-resistance trained women after detraining and retraining. J Appl Physiol. 1991;70(2):631–640. 
(7) Wilmore JH, Costill DL. Physiology of Sport and Exercise. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 1994.
291
Physical Fitness: The Necessary Foundation
KEY CONCEPTS
Below are a variety of key concepts relating to overall 
physical fitness. This list is not complete but provides 
an overview of key ideas.
Components of Physical Fitness
Components of physical fitness include both health- 
and skill-related attributes. The health-related components include:
 
• body composition
 
• cardiovascular fitness
 
• muscular endurance
 
• muscular strength
 
• flexibility
In contrast, the skill-related components include:
 
• agility
 
• power
 
• balance
 
• reaction time
 
• coordination
 
• speed
Each of these components is important for the 
physical fitness of service members and mission 
performance. Some of the components have been defined above and others require no real definition. For 
example, although flexibility has been defined above, 
it is important to note that exercises to maintain 
flexibility should be incorporated into any standard 
program to help ensure all muscles maintain their 
proper length and movements are performed with 
proper mechanics. This is key to preventing injury. 
Incorporating flexibility training can also improve 
muscle imbalances by maintaining the appropriate 
length-tension relationship.
The US armed forces use body composition (a 
measure of a person’s body fat) as one component 
to determine a service member’s physical fitness. 
If a service member is “overfat,” it can adversely 
affect his or her career, including the ability to be 
promoted and even stay in the military. Each service 
branch has its own standards within DoD Instruction 1308. 1. 17 The Human Performance Resource 
Center (see Resources, below) provides a chart that 
compares one service’s standards to another. Because the standards change, it is important to keep 
up with one’s own service, but the chart is useful 
for service members and healthcare providers. 38
Power
Power is a very important concept for military 
readiness and performance. Simply stated, power 
is the ability to perform muscular work per unit of 
time (power = work/time). If strength is defined as the 
ability to exert force, power is the ability to exert force 
quickly: being able to move a heavy weight quickly, 
being able to move quickly when carrying a heavy 
load, or being able to quickly carry an injured service 
member from one place to another. Power is related 
to strength, aerobic capacity, and speed. 
Mobility
Mobility is the ability to perform functional 
movement patterns with no restrictions in range 
of motion: it involves multiple elements that influence performance. Warm-up mobility exercises 
(eg, posterior hip mobilization, shoulder extension, 
external rotation, anterior hip mobilization, ankle 
dorsiflexion, deep squats, couch stretch) allow the 
service member to prepare for performing jumping, 
climbing, and sprinting activities and maneuvering 
around obstacles more efficiently. These exercises 
also limit the risk of injury as they reinforce proper 
technique. Strength in the extremities directly relates 
to the ability to perform mobility tasks, which means 
that mobility overlaps with the strength component 
of fitness. Optimized mobility training can increase a 
service member’s capacity for strength and endurance 
and minimize the possibility for injury. 39
Plyometrics
Plyometrics are exercises performed so that muscles 
exert maximum force in short intervals of time to 
achieve increasing power (speed-strength). Designed 
to improve lower-body mobility and power, these 
exercises include jumping up onto a higher surface 
and back down. Data suggest that plyometric training 
benefits service members in terms of increased maximal strength, power output, coordination, and overall 
performance. Combining plyometrics with lower-body 
strength training appears to greatly improve strength 
performance. 40,41 Thus, current evidence supports 
incorporating several types of plyometrics with other 
types of training into fitness programs. 
292
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
Physical Readiness/Fitness Tests
All of the services require some type of physical fitness assessment. Table 20-1 presents each of the tests 
service members must pass (unless they are on a physical profile). Currently they all include a run and sit-ups, 
plus either push-ups or pull-ups, and all of the services 
have body composition standards. The Marine Corps 
was the first service to develop a functional test designed 
to evaluate combat fitness. Thus, Marines perform two 
semi-annual fitness tests, a physical readiness test and 
a combat fitness test. The other services are developing 
functional tests to assess operational/combat fitness, and 
in 2017, the Army rolled out the Occupational Physical 
Assessment Test (OPAT) for all recruits and soldiers. 
This requirement resulted from the Army’s effort to 
integrate women into its previously closed combat specialties. The OPAT consists of four events: a medicineball throw, standing long jump, deadlift, and interval 
run. It will eventually be used to determine which jobs 
recruits are qualified to perform.
Overtraining
Overtraining is the end result of excessive training. 
The most common signs are a decline in physical performance with continued training, pronounced fatigue, 
and changes in mood. The condition involves a complex interplay among the neuroendocrine, immune, 
and central nervous systems, as well as psychological 
and social stressors in response to prolonged strenuous 
training without sufficient recovery. 42 Military training 
can be intense, and overtraining can occur particularly 
in the absence of adequate sleep and nutrition. The 
mechanisms of overtraining have not been adequately 
elucidated.
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Within the military, physical fitness standards may 
vary depending on the population. Brief discussions 
about pregnancy and postpartum physical fitness; aging; and the wounded, ill, and injured are provided.
Pregnancy and Postpartum Physical Fitness
Pregnant service members constitute an important 
subgroup of the military population, and fitness 
requirements must be tailored to this condition. 
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that pregnant women perform 
moderate-intensity exercise for a total of 150 minutes, 
spread over the course of a week. 43 Despite these recommendations, many service members do not maintain optimal physical training during pregnancy. 44 It 
is recognized that some women may not be able to 
maintain fitness due to a variety of complications, but 
in general, physical fitness can and should be maintained during pregnancy across the services. Service 
members who participate in a pregnancy wellness 
program (see the American College of Sports Medicine, Army Pregnancy Postpartum Physical Training, 
and the Human Performance Resource Center websites, under Resources, below) have been shown to 
have shorter labor durations and a lower incidence 
of premature delivery. 45 Likewise, physical fitness in 
the postpartum period remains a challenge for a large 
percentage of service members. Service-led physical 
fitness programs for postpartum service members 
have been shown to improve participants’ overall 
physical capacity. 46
TABLE 20-1
PHYSICAL READINESS TESTS, BY SERVICE
Service 
Task 1 
Task 2 
Task 3
Air Force 
Sit-ups (1 min) 
Push-ups (1 min) 
1. 5-Mile run
Army 
Sit-ups (2 min) 
Push-ups (2 min) 
2. 0-Mile run
Marines* 
Crunches (2 min) 
Pull-ups (males); flex-arm hang (females) 
3. 0-Mile run
Marines† 
880-Yard run 
Ammo lifts–30 lb (2 min) 
Maneuver under fire (300 m)
Navy 
Curl-ups (2 min) 
Push-ups (2 min) 
1. 5-Mile run
*Marine Corps Performance Fitness Test
†Marine Corps Combat Fitness Test
293
Physical Fitness: The Necessary Foundation
Aging
Service members 40 years and older typically serve as 
senior military leaders. Leaders must set good examples 
and serve as positive role models for those under their 
command; this includes maintaining and demonstrating 
a high level of physical fitness. Even if their normal duties are stressful (but nonphysical), these service members must regularly partake in physical exercise so their 
fitness is maintained and does not degrade with age.
Service members who are fit at age 40 and continue 
to exercise show smaller decreases in many fitnessrelated physiological functions compared to those who 
exercise less often. 47 Those who have been exercising 
regularly can continue to exercise at the same level. 
Those aged 40 and over who have not been exercising 
regularly should start at a lower level of intensity and 
progress slowly. Long periods of inactivity cannot be 
corrected in a few weeks or even months.
Wounded, Injured, and Ill Service Members
DoD Directive 1308. 1 requires that “those personnel identified with medically limiting defects shall be 
placed in a physical fitness program consistent with 
their limitations as advised by medical authorities.”17 
AR 350-15 states, “For individuals with limiting 
profiles, commanders will develop physical fitness 
programs in cooperation with health care personnel.”48 Medical treatment and rehabilitation should 
be aimed at restoring these service members to a suitable level of physical fitness. Such treatment should 
use appropriate, progressive physical activities with 
medical or unit supervision (see the American College 
of Sports Medicine, Building the Soldier Athlete–Reconditioning [Profile] Physical Training Supplement, 
the Human Performance Resource Center, National 
Strength and Conditioning Association, and US Army 
Physical Readiness Training Information websites, 
under Resources, below). The activity levels of service 
members usually decrease while they are recovering 
from sickness or injury. With medical supervision, 
proper diet, and the right physical training programs, 
service members should be able to overcome their 
physical profiles more quickly and return to their 
normal routines and fitness levels.
All profiled service members should complete as 
much of the unit’s regular fitness program as possible. The Office of the Surgeon General of the Army 
developed DA Form 3349 to facilitate the exchange 
of information between healthcare personnel and 
their units. 49 On this form, healthcare personnel list 
the service member’s physical limitations along with 
activities the individual can perform to maintain his 
or her fitness level. Based on this information, the unit 
should direct profiled service members to participate 
in appropriate activities to replace those they cannot 
participate in. 
PHYSICAL FITNESS AND THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Role of the Military Medical Officer 
Military medical officers (MMOs) serve critical 
roles in supporting achievement and maintenance 
of physical fitness and readiness considerations 
at the unit level. They are responsible for being a 
role model, but must first build relationships with 
their unit. The MMO should support human performance optimization and provide the highest level 
of preventive healthcare. The MMO must be able to 
effectively communicate with and translate medical 
and scientific knowledge into actionable plans that 
support ongoing physical training activities and 
military operations. The MMO should be familiar 
with concepts related to physical fitness and competent in key topics such as functional movement, 
strength and resistance training, overtraining, and 
exercise prescription. Additionally, knowledge 
about service-specific and DoD regulations and 
guidance regarding body composition and physical 
fitness are critical. Lastly, the MMO must identify 
physical fitness subject matter experts (SMEs) they 
can contact to obtain additional reliable information 
when necessary. 
Guidance to the Commanding Officer
The MMO serves as the primary consultant to the 
commander regarding the overall health status of the 
unit. As such, the MMO is responsible for:
 
• Monitoring physical fitness levels and advising the unit commander on profiling those 
who are ill, injured, or wounded. The MMO 
must also ensure that standard physical fitness programs are consistent with their service’s requirements and understand both the 
commander’s intent and the mission goals. 
This information will allow the MMO to 
correctly identify the unit’s physical training 
and fitness needs.
 
• Monitoring musculoskeletal injuries and 
physical profiling of service members. This 
task requires a full understanding of the 
294
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
Accurate assessment of strengths and vulnerabilities 
in the quest for optimal fitness is essential in guiding both 
individuals and units to peak military performance. Understanding the physiologic construct of fitness and how 
the factors of military fitness requirements may change 
can help an MMO make better decisions and recommendations to the unit commander. Appreciation of the 
interrelatedness of the components of physical fitness 
can help the MMO tailor better individual fitness plans 
and ensure optimal fitness for every member of the unit. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Kennedy JF. The soft American. Sports Illustrated. 1960;13(26):14–17.
 
2. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Chairman’s Total Force Fitness Framework. Washington, DC: JCS; 2013. CJCS Instruction 3405. 01. https://www.hprc-online.org/resources/chairman-of-the-joint-chiefs-of-staff-instruction-cjcsi. Accessed 
February 5, 2018.
 
3. Jonas WB, Deuster PA, Macednoia C, eds. Total force fitness for the 21st century: a new paradigm. Mil Med. 2010;175(8):1–
78.
 
4. Horne A. Monty: The Lonely Leader, 1944-1945. New York, NY: HarperCollins; 1994.
physical requirements of service members’ 
jobs, the physical fitness guidelines for the 
service, and the current health status of each 
service member. Physical limitations should 
protect service members from further injury 
while encouraging alternative activities that 
sustain their overall fitness level.
 
• Working closely with physical fitness SMEs to 
review the training program intended to develop individual service members at the highest level of fitness for their specific specialty.
 
• Ensuring the physical training program is 
safe and limits the risk of injuries.
 
• Keeping the commander updated about the 
physical readiness of individual service members and reviewing training plans for those 
with special fitness considerations such as 
pregnancy, illness, or injury. These tailored 
plans should draw on advice from fitness 
SMEs.
RESOURCES
 
• American College of Sports Medicine: http://acsm.org/
 
• Building the Soldier Athlete—Reconditioning (Profile) Physical Training Supplement: http://armymedicine.mil/Documents/R2D-Building_the_Soldier_Athlete_Reconditioning_profile_Supplement_-_7_
Oct_09.pdf
 
• Air Force Fitness Program: http://www.afpc.af.mil/affitnessprogram/
 
• Army Comprehensive Soldier and Family Fitness: http://csf2.army.mil/
 
• ARMYFIT—Comprehensive Soldier and Family Fitness: https://armyfit.army.mil/
 
• Army Pregnancy Postpartum Physical Training: https://phc.amedd.army.mil/topics/healthyliving/al/
Pages/ArmyPregnancyPostpartumPhysicalTrainingProgram.aspx
 
• Commander, Navy Installations Command—Fitness, Sports and Deployed Forces Support: http://www.
navyfitness.org/fitness/
 
• Human Performance Resource Center: http://hprc-online.org/
 
• National Strength and Conditioning Association: https://www.nsca.com/
 
• US Army Public Health Center—Army Physical Fitness: https://phc.amedd.army.mil/TOPICS/
HEALTHYLIVING/AL/Pages/ArmyPhysicalFitness.aspx
 
• US Army Physical Readiness Training Information: http://www.armyprt.com/
 
• US Coast Guard Office of Work-Life Programs—Physical Fitness Program: http://www.uscg.mil/worklife/
physical_fitness_program.asp
 
• US Marine Corps Physical Fitness Program: http://www.fitness.marines.mil/
SUMMARY
295
Physical Fitness: The Necessary Foundation
 
5. US Department of War. Manual of Physical Training. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1914. 
 
6. Magee JC. Relationship of the health of civilians to the efficacy of the Army. Am J Pub Health. 1940;30(11):1283–1290.
 
7. US Department of War. Basic Field Manual, Physical Training. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1941. Field 
Manual 21-10.
 
8. US Marine Corps. US Marine Combat Conditioning. New York, NY: Skyhorse Publishing; 2011.
 
9. US Bureau of Naval Personnel. Physical Fitness Manual for the U.S. Navy. Washington, DC: Bureau of Naval Personnel; 1943.
 10. Physical Conditioning. Washington, DC: Department of War; 1944. Pamphlet No. 21-9.
 11. East WB. A Historical Review and Analysis of Army Physical Readiness Training and Assessment. Fort Leavenworth, KS: 
Combat Studies Institute Press; 2013.
 12. US Department of the Army. Physical Training. Washington, DC: DA; 1946. Field Manual 21-20.
 13. US Department of the Army. Physical Readiness Training. Washington, DC: DA; 1959. Field Manual 21-20.
 14. US Army Infantry School. Physical Fitness Symposium Report. Fort Benning, GA; 1970.
 15. US Department of the Army. Physical Readiness Training. Washington, DC: DA; 1973. Field Manual 21-20.
 16. US Department of the Army. Physical Training. Washington, DC: DA; 1985. Field Manual 21-20.
 17. US Department of Defense. Physical Fitness and Weight Control Programs. Washington, DC: DoD; 1981. DoD Directive 
1308. 1.
 18. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. The recommended quantity and quality of exercise for developing 
and maintaining cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness in healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1998;30(6):975–991.
 19. US Department of Army. Training in Units. Washington, DC: DA; 1993. Army Regulation 350-41.
 20. Henning PC, Park BS, Kim JS. Physiological decrements during sustained military operational stress. Mil Med. 
2011;176(9):991–997.
 21. Silverman MN, Deuster PA. Biological mechanisms underlying the role of physical fitness in health and resilience. 
Interface Focus. 2014;4(5):20140040.
 22. Flanagan SC, Kotwal RS, Forsten RD. Preparing soldiers for the stress of combat. J Spec Oper Med. 2012;12(2):33–41.
 23. World Health Organization. Global Recommendation on Physical Activity for Health. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 
2010.
 24. Macera CA, Hootman JM, Sniezek JE. Major public health benefits of physical activity. Arthritis Rheum. 2003;49(1):122–
128.
 25. Macera CA, Powell KE. Population attributable risk: implications of physical activity dose. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2001;33(6 Supplement):S635–S639; discussion 640-1.
 26. Miles L. The new World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research report. Food, nutrition, physical activity and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective. Nutr Bull. 2008;33(1):26–32.
 27. Smits JA, Berry AC, Rosefield D, Powers MB, Behar E, Otto MW. Reducing anxiety sensitivity with exercise. Depress 
Anxiety. 2008;25(8):698–699.
296
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
 28. Cooney GM, Dwan K, Greig CA, et al. Exercise for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;9: CD004366. DOI: 
10. 1002/14651858.CD004366.pub6.
 29. Carek PJ, Laibstain SE, Carek SM. Exercise for the treatment of depression and anxiety. Int J Psychiatry Med. 
2011;41(1):15–28.
 30. Galper DI, Trivedi MH, Barlow CE, Dunn AL, Kampert JP. Inverse association between physical inactivity and mental 
health in men and women. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38(1):173–178.
 31. Crews DJ, Landers DM. A meta-analytic review of aerobic fitness and reactivity to psychosocial stressors. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc. 1987;19(5 Suppl):S114–S120.
 32. Tsatsoulis A, Fountoulakis S. The protective role of exercise on stress system dysregulation and comorbidities. Ann 
N Y Acad Sci. 2006;1083:196–213.
 33. Ekeland E, Heian F, Hagen KB, Abbott J, Nordheim L. Exercise to improve self-esteem in children and young people. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;1:CD003683.
 34. Young MD, Plotnikoff RC, Collins CE, Callister R, Morgan PJ. Social cognitive theory and physical activity: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev. 2014;15(12):982–995.
 35. Deuster PA, Silverman MN. Physical fitness: a pathway to health and resilience. US Army Med Dep J. 2013;Oct-Dec:24–35.
 36. US Department of the Army. Prevention and Control of Muskuloskeletal Injuries Associated with Physical Training. Washington, DC: DA; 2011. Technical Bulletin 592.
 37. Knapik JJ, Harman EA, Steelman RA, Graham BS. A systematic review of the effects of physical training on load carriage performance. J Strength Cond Res. 2012;26(2):585–597.
 38. Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Consortium for Health and Military Performance. Body fat 
standards by service branch. Human Performance Resource Center website. https://www.hprc-online.org/articles/
body-fat-standards-by-service-branch. Accessed November 17, 2017.
 39. Nalcakan GR. The effects of sprint interval vs. continuous endurance training on physiological and metabolic adaptions in young healthy adults. J Hum Kinet. 2014;44:97–109.
 40. Villareal SS, Requena B, Newton RU. Does plyometric training improve strength performance? A meta-analysis. J Sci 
Med Sports. 2010;13(5):513–522.
 41. Taylor J, Macpherson T, Spears I, Weston M. The effects of repeated-sprint training on field-based fitness measures: 
a meta-analysis of controlled and non-controlled trials. Sports Med. 2015;45(6):881–891.
 42. Purvis D, Gonsalves S, Deuster PA. Physiological and psychological fatigue in extreme conditions: overtraining and 
elite athletes. PMR. 2010;2(5):442–450.
 43. Committee on Obstetric Practice. ACOG committee opinion. Exercise during pregnancy and the postpartum period. 
Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2002;77(1):79–81.
 44. Kwolek LA, Berry-Caban CS, Thomas SF. Pregnant soldiers’ participation in physical training: a descriptive study. 
Mil Med. 2011;176(8):926–931.
 45. Lombardi W, Wilson S, Peniston PB. Wellness intervention with pregnant soldiers. Mil Med. 1999;164(1):22–29.
 46. Gilcreast DM. Pregnancy Soldier Wellness Program: An Evaluation. Fort Bragg, NC: Triservice Nursing Research Program; 
1997. https://www.usuhs.edu/node/3305. Accessed February 5, 2018.
 47. Elia EA. Exercise and the elderly. Clin Sports Med. 1991;10(1):141–155.
297
Physical Fitness: The Necessary Foundation
 48. US Department of the Army. The Army Physical Fitness Program. Washington, DC: DA 1989. Army Regulation 350-15.
 49. US Department of the Army. DA Form 3349: Physical Profile. 2007.
298
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
