621
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
Chapter 40
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE IN THE 
DEPLOYED ENVIRONMENT
LUCAS A. JOHNSON, MD, MTM&H,* and SHAWN M. GARCIA, MD, MPH†
INTRODUCTION
IMMUNIZATION
CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
SEXUAL HEALTH
ORAL HEALTH
VECTOR CONTROL
WATER STANDARDS
FOOD STANDARDS
WASTE DISPOSAL
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
UNIT-LEVEL MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE
OUTBREAK INVESTIGATIONS
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
RISK COMMUNICATION
SUMMARY
*Lieutenant Commander, Medical Corps, US Navy; Assistant Professor of Preventive Medicine and Biostatistics, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
†Lieutenant Commander, Medical Corps, US Navy; Assistant Professor of Preventive Medicine and Biostatistics, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
622
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Military personnel serving in operational environments experience a variety of potentially hazardous 
exposures. It is well known that conflict erodes 
existing public health infrastructure, resulting in 
outbreaks of disease associated with poor hygiene, 
contamination of food and drinking water, and interruption of vector control measures. Because of the 
ubiquity of these exposures in operational settings, a 
variety of effective countermeasures are directed by 
Department of Defense (DoD) policy, as well as guidance specific to the area of operation, which should 
be incorporated when planning military operations. 
It is the responsibility of the locally assigned military 
leadership, in coordination with the military medical officer (MMO), to assure appropriate preventive 
medicine resources and risk mitigation procedures 
are available at the tactical and operational levels to 
maximize force readiness and preserve the health of 
deployed forces. 
Perhaps more than any other medical discipline, 
preventive medicine activities influence combat operations at every level of warfighting. Minimizing or 
mitigating potentially hazardous exposures permits 
the conduct of operations in environments typically inhospitable to routine tactical maneuvering. 
Through disease prevention activities, commanders 
can more easily maintain operational troop strength 
and lose fewer soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines 
to preventable illness. Finally, in preserving and 
maintaining the health of service members through 
wellness and readiness initiatives, preventive medicine acts as a strategic force multiplier, helping to 
ensure a ready and capable force prepared for worldwide deployment. 
IMMUNIZATION
Immunization is recognized as one of the great 
public health achievements of the 20th century. 1 The 
ability to confer lasting, sterile immunity to previously 
immune-naïve individuals for the purpose of interrupting and preventing infection has saved countless 
lives; smallpox vaccination alone is estimated to have 
prevented 5 million deaths globally each year since 
its development. 2 
Two critical measures influence how effectively 
the use of a particular vaccine can prevent disease 
at the population level. Vaccine efficacy, the reduction in incidence of disease among those who have 
received vaccination as compared to those who have 
not, measures how well a vaccine prevents disease in 
exposed persons. Vaccine uptake, the proportion of 
individuals who have completed all recommended 
doses of a vaccine, measures population compliance 
with immunization recommendations. High vaccine 
efficacy combined with high vaccine uptake results 
in the phenomenon of herd immunity, a condition in 
which an infectious disease is denied a population 
of susceptible hosts, and can no longer be efficiently 
transmitted within the largely vaccinated community. In reducing the prevalence of circulating disease, 
herd immunity also benefits those few individuals 
unable to be vaccinated due to comorbidities or 
contraindications. While the exact proportions for 
specific diseases vary, herd immunity is generally 
achieved once a population’s vaccine uptake approaches 85%. 3 
Unit medical assets are responsible for ensuring 
attached personnel have received immunizations 
required by service-specific instruction as well 
as geographic command entry requirements. The 
Defense Health Agency Immunization Healthcare 
Branch is an excellent source of military vaccine 
information, including vaccine entry requirements 
for each geographic area of responsibility. 4 Ensuring appropriate vaccination is critically important 
when managing populations likely to experience 
close-quarters living (recruit training centers, barracks residents, ship’s berthing); overcrowding 
(refugee camps, prisons, detention centers); or 
foreign travel. 5 
CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
While sterile immunity remains the gold standard for preventing illness, many military-relevant 
infectious agents do not yet have an effective vaccine 
countermeasure. In some instances pharmaceutical 
interventions (chemoprophylaxis) exist to prevent 
diseases for which vaccines are not yet available. 
Malaria 
As early as 1768, James Lind advocated for malaria 
chemoprophylaxis, recommending that “every man 
receive a daily ration of cinchona powder” while 
visiting tropical ports. 6 In virtually every theater of 
623
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
EXHIBIT 40-1
COMMAND PRESERVATION OF HEALTH 
Burma, 1943. Lieutenant General William Slim’s 
troop strength was severely compromised. For every 
soldier evacuated with combat wounds, 120 were 
evacuated due to illness, a rate of 12 per 1,000 per 
day. The annual malaria attack rate was 84%, rendering a large percentage of his force combat ineffective for months at a time. Slim recalled, “A simple 
calculation showed me that in a matter of months at 
this rate my army would have melted away. Indeed, 
it was doing so under my eyes.”1
An effective prophylaxis for malaria, mepacrine, 
was available, and evidence of therapeutic compliance easily assessed on physical exam. However, 
unfounded rumors of the drug causing impotence 
resulted in poor adherence. Slim’s solution was 
simple but effective:
I, therefore, had surprise checks of whole units, every man being examined. If the overall result was 
less than ninety-five percent positive I sacked the 
commanding officer. I only had to sack three; by then 
the rest had got my meaning. 1
Within months, Slim’s malaria forward treatment 
unit wards were largely empty. By 1945 illness rates 
plummeted 10-fold, to 1 solder per 1,000 per day. 
Lieutenant General Slim recognized and leveraged 
a fundamental relationship in preserving the health 
of his forces:
Good doctors are of no use without good discipline. 
More than half the battle against disease is not fought 
by doctors, but by regimental officers. It is they who 
see that the daily dose of mepacrine is taken, that 
shorts are never worn, that shirts are put on and 
sleeves turned down before sunset, that minor abrasions are treated before, not after, they go septic, that 
bodily cleanliness is enforced. 1
1. Slim W. Defeat into Victory. 2nd ed. London, UK: Cassell 
& Company Ltd; 1956.
war since then, many reports have been published 
on the military’s experience with chemoprophylaxis. 
From the Pacific campaign of World War II to the 2003 
peacekeeping operations in Liberia, the primary lesson 
learned remained unchanged for the greater part of a 
century: enforcement of appropriate chemoprophylaxis use is a command responsibility (Exhibit 40-1). 7 
Several highly effective agents are available for use 
as malaria chemoprophylaxis; each has its own considerations (Table 40-1). Chloroquine was previously 
used extensively across the globe, but development of 
resistance has restricted its utility to geographic areas 
known to have no chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium 
species. Currently the vast majority of US service 
members receive doxycycline or atovaquone-proguanil 
malaria chemoprophylaxis. Providers should always 
ensure chemoprophylaxis selection is appropriate for 
local resistance patterns. Mefloquine carries a “black 
box” warning due to well-described neurologic and 
psychiatric side effects and should be prescribed within 
the DoD only as a “drug of last resort.”8 
Service member compliance with malaria chemoprophylaxis is historically low. Survey data from Operation 
Enduring Freedom (OEF) veterans indicate compliance with daily dosed regimens approached 60%, and 
compliance with weekly dosed regimens was less than 
40%. 9 Whenever possible, malaria chemoprophylaxis 
should be administered at the unit level as directly 
observed therapy (DOT). DOT increases medication 
compliance and appropriately empowers commanders with a means to preserve the health of their forces. 
Travelers who spend prolonged periods of time 
(generally 6 months or more) in regions with P vivax 
and P ovale require presumptive anti-relapse therapy 
(PART) with primaquine for 2 weeks following their 
return. Primaquine is effective in eradicating the liver 
hypnozoite phase of P vivax and P ovale. However, 
primaquine can be used only in G6PD-normal individuals, and no agent is currently approved for PART 
in service members who are G6PD deficient. Such 
individuals should be thoroughly counseled regarding bite avoidance and prophylaxis compliance if they 
require travel to areas where PART would otherwise 
be recommended. 
Leptospirosis 
Leptospira is a spirochete bacteria typically transmitted through soil or fresh water contaminated by 
animal urine. Bacterial invasion occurs through cuts 
in the skin or mucous membrane exposure. Historically significant leptospirosis outbreaks among service 
members have only occurred among participants in 
jungle warfare training who experience substantial 
amounts of untreated fresh water exposure in tropical environments. Civilian exposures typically result 
from flooding in the tropics as well as participation 
in fresh water adventure sports. Doxycycline 200 mg 
orally once weekly is believed to provide some protection against leptospirosis infection for individuals 
624
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 40-1
MALARIA CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS AGENTS
Agent
Usage
Adult Dose
Start
Stop
Can be 
Used in 
Pregnancy?*
Special Considerations
Doxycycline
All areas
100 mg PO 
once daily
2 days before 
travel to malarious area
4 weeks after 
exit from malarious area
No
GI upset; better tolerated if taken with 
food. Sun sensitivity. 
Atovaquone/ 
proguanil
All areas
250 mg atovaquone/ 100 
mg proguanil 
PO once daily
1–2 days 
before travel 
to malarious 
area
7 days after 
exit from malarious area
No
Contraindicated if 
creatinine clearance 
<30 mL/min.
Chloroquine
Chloroquinesensitive 
areas only
300 mg base 
(500 mg salt) 
PO once 
weekly
1–2 weeks 
before travel 
to malarious 
area
4 weeks after 
exit from malarious area
Yes
Few geographic 
areas for use. May 
exacerbate psoriasis.
Mefloquine
Mefloquinesensitive 
areas only
228 mg base 
(250 mg salt) 
PO once 
weekly
2 weeks before 
travel to malarious area
4 weeks after 
exit from malarious area
Yes
Contraindicated 
in patients with 
certain psychiatric 
disorders, seizures, 
cardiac conduction 
abnormalities. DoD 
chemoprophylaxis 
of last resort. 
Primaquine
Presumptive 
anti-relapse 
therapy for 
Plasmodium 
vivax and P 
ovale hypnozoites
30 mg base 
(52. 6 mg salt) 
PO daily for 
14 days
After exit from 
malarious 
area
After full 2-wk 
dose
No
Contraindicated 
in patients with 
depression, anxiety, 
psychosis, other 
major psychiatric 
disorders, seizures. 
Requires normal 
G6PD level.
DoD: Department of Defense; GI: gastrointestinal; PO: per os (by mouth). 
*Data source for pregnancy information: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Choosing a drug to prevent malaria. https://www.
cdc.gov/malaria/travelers/drugs.html. Published April 25, 2018. Accessed June 6, 2018.
with limited, discrete exposures to potentially infected 
water. Prophylaxis should begin 1 to 2 days before 
potential exposure and continue throughout the period of exposure. 10 The value of chemoprophylaxis for 
populations with continuous exposures in endemic 
areas is unclear. 11
Group A Streptococcus 
Group A streptococcal infections are a particular 
challenge in the recruit setting, where crowding and 
inadequate hygiene can result in historically aggressive 
disease manifested by severe pneumonias, empyemas, 
and tonsillar abscesses. Since the advent of penicillin, 
military recruit depots have employed chemoprophylaxis to prevent Group A streptococcal infections. 
Across the services, all recruit training depots engage 
in year-round prophylaxis, with 1. 2 million units of 
benzathine penicillin G (PCN) administered intramuscularly (IM) during the first week of training. IM 
PCN protects recruits for approximately 28 days and 
can be re-dosed if indicated by historical surveillance 
or an active outbreak. Penicillin-allergic recruits may 
alternatively be treated with 1 g oral azithromycin 
weekly for 4 weeks, or 250 mg erythromycin twice 
daily for 4 weeks. 
625
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
SEXUAL HEALTH
The force health protection threat posed by sexual 
activity is an often-neglected reality of operational 
and deployed military settings. Despite overwhelming 
evidence to the contrary, some commanders believe 
prohibition of sexual activity alone is a sufficient intervention to prevent sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs) and pregnancies in operational settings. History 
has repeatedly demonstrated this view as fallacious, 
most recently during OEF and Operation Iraqi Freedom. From 2004 to 2009, over 750 cases of chlamydia 
and gonorrhea were identified in combat-deployed US 
military personnel. In some cohorts, rates of chlamydia 
exceeded stateside civilian age-matched rates. 12 
Continuous promotion of safe sexual behavior, as 
well as creating an environment where sexual health 
issues can be confidentially discussed with a medical 
provider, is critical for preserving force health. Condoms are essential medical supplies that should be 
available at every echelon of care, discretely and free of 
charge, regardless of geography or cultural normative 
behavior of host countries. 
Specific expert recommendations for MMOs include (1) promoting condom use as normal protective 
behavior and characterizing unprotected sexual activity as unnecessarily risky and abnormal; (2) identifying 
and screening those at risk for STIs (providers should 
understand demographic factors influencing the 
epidemiology of specific STIs); (3) ensuring treatment 
(including treatment of sexual partners whenever 
possible) occurs in accordance with US Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention recommendations; 
and (4) ensuring confidentiality of reported high-risk 
behaviors. 13 
Contraceptive availability is a critical component 
of sexual health. Female service members should be 
counseled on the availability and efficacy of common 
contraceptives. In operational or deployed settings 
where hygiene can become complicated, hormonal 
contraception that can induce reversible menstrual 
cycle suppression may be of interest to female service 
members. 14 Like condoms, contraception, including 
emergency contraception, is an essential medical 
supply that should be available to service members at 
every echelon of care with as few barriers as possible. 
ORAL HEALTH
Oral health is an essential component of combat 
readiness. Service members with oral disease may 
suffer impaired performance of their duties, poor 
diet, sleep disturbances, and pain. Despite being a 
dentally ready force, the Army recorded over 900 
unique dental emergencies in service members deployed to Afghanistan each month from July 2009 to 
June 2011. 15 Research suggests the risk of a service 
member suffering severe dental disease increases 
by approximately 4. 5% for every month deployed. 16 
Proper screening creates a dentally ready force that is 
one-third as likely to experience a dental emergency 
requiring care as compared to an unscreened force. 17 
Certain cohorts of service members have demonstrated increased risk for a dental emergency in deployed 
settings; in comparison to the active component of 
the Army, members of the Army National Guard and 
Army Reserve demonstrated a 50% increased risk of 
dental disease during OEF. 16 Assuring appropriate 
and timely treatment and follow-up after screening 
prevents impediments to dental readiness prior to 
and during deployment.
VECTOR CONTROL
Vector-borne disease is a substantial force protection threat in operational and deployed settings. 
Climate change increases the spread of vector-borne 
disease to novel areas, making threats more likely in 
environments previously inhospitable to arthropod 
vectors. 18 While certain diseases have effective vaccines or chemoprophylaxis measures, minimizing 
exposure remains the cornerstone of all vector-borne 
illness prevention.
Minimizing vector exposure begins with avoidance. 
Both the lifecycle and preferred feeding time of many 
arthropod vectors follow well-established seasonal, 
rainfall, and diurnal patterns. Minimizing outdoor 
exposure during peak biting periods (if tactically permissible) can substantially decrease the likelihood of 
bites. Similarly, when locations are chosen for habitation in the field, the surrounding vector habitat should 
be considered. Whenever possible, sites for human 
habitation should be open, dry, and positioned away 
from local settlements, animal pens, or rodent burrows.
Reducing the exposed biting surface available to an 
arthropod is a critically important practice for service 
members. Proper wear of a long-sleeve military uniform reduces exposure to potential vectors. Sleeves 
should be worn down and pant leggings should be 
property bloused or tucked into the boot in the field 
626
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
environment. At night, bed nets are an additional 
measure of protection against arthropods. Chemical 
repellants further augment bite avoidance. Permethrin, 
the DoD standard repellent used to treat clothing, 
opens voltage-dependent sodium channels in arthropod nervous systems to cause paralysis and death. 
In high-transmission environments, bed nets should 
be utilized and treated with permethrin. The exterior 
of canvas tents can also be treated with permethrin. 
Many services now issue uniforms factory-treated 
with permethrin, which protect for 50 wash cycles or 
more. While each uniform contains specific wash and 
re-treatment instructions, factory-treated uniforms 
generally remain effective for 12 months. 19 Uniforms 
can be treated professionally or using a field expedient 
method (aerosol spray, individual dynamic absorption, air compressed spray). The Armed Forces Pest 
Management Board is an excellent resource for information about treatment methods and service-specific 
uniform considerations.
DEET (N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide or N,N-diethyl3-methylbenzamide) has been the US military skin 
repellant of choice for over 60 years. When applied 
to exposed skin at concentrations over 20%, DEET is 
effective in repelling a variety of arthropods. 20 Picaridin (1-piperidinecarboxylic acid 2-(2-hydroxyethyl)1-methylpropylester) is a newer repellant that appears 
to have a repellant profile at least equivalent to DEET 
while also being less irritating to skin and less corrosive 
to plastics. 21 DEET or picaridin should be applied to 
any exposed skin not covered by a permethrin-treated 
uniform as part of the DoD insect repellent system. A 
variety of DEET and picaridin products are approved 
for military use, assigned a National Stock Number 
(NSN), and available for unit-level procurement.
The 2012 death of a US soldier from rabies and, in 
2014, the largest-ever military rabies contact investigation, illustrate the continued threat animal bites pose 
to service members. 22,23 Rabies virus is transmitted 
through the blood, saliva, and nervous tissue of infected mammals. While preexposure and postexposure 
regimens are highly effective at preventing human 
rabies, avoidance remains the primary mechanism 
of rabies protection for the vast majority of service 
members. With the exclusion of US working dogs, all 
mammals encountered in the operational or deployed 
setting are potential rabies threats. Adoption of stray 
animals as unit mascots represents an unacceptable 
risk and should be prohibited by commanders.
DoD guidance outlines indications for specific individuals (veterinarians, laboratory workers, military 
working dog handlers, etc) to receive preexposure 
rabies vaccine due to their elevated risk of coming in 
contact with rabies virus. 24 Rabies virus preexposure 
vaccination consists of three doses of immunization 
delivered on days 0, 7, and 21. 25 
Rabies postexposure prophylaxis becomes necessary when individuals have blood or mucous membrane exposure to the saliva, blood, or central nervous 
tissue of potentially rabid animals. Bat bites may leave 
little, if any, evidence of puncture wounds and may 
not be noticed by a sleeping person. If there is any 
chance that physical contact with a bat occurred, the 
bat should be tested for rabies. If the bat is not available for testing, then rabies postexposure prophylaxis 
should be administered. Clear documentation of an 
animal having received appropriate rabies vaccination or an examination by a veterinarian familiar with 
rabies are the only acceptable means of verifying an 
animal as being free of rabies. In all other mammalian 
bite cases, MMOs should strongly consider rabies postexposure prophylaxis due to the near 100% fatality rate 
of human rabies once a person becomes symptomatic. 
Postexposure prophylaxis consists of cleaning the 
wound, administering 20 IU/kg body weight of rabies immunoglobulin injected as proximal to the bite 
site as possible, and four doses of rabies vaccine, on 
days 0, 3, 7, and 14, administered in the contralateral 
deltoid. 26 Previously vaccinated individuals should 
generally not receive immunoglobulin; instead, they 
should receive a truncated two-dose vaccine schedule 
on days 0 and 3. 
WATER STANDARDS
Ample quantities of safe water are necessary 
for preservation of health, hygiene, and force 
readiness. Improperly treated drinking water can 
transmit a variety of bacterial, viral, protozoan, 
and parasitic diseases. All potential water sources 
generated in field conditions (including water from 
municipal host nation water systems) should be 
considered unsafe for consumption unless evaluated and approved by trained preventive medicine 
personnel. 27 
The majority of drinking water produced from field 
sources is generated by a portable reverse osmosis 
water purification unit (ROWPU) or procured from 
commercial sources. After initial purification and treatment to remove dissolved solids and contaminates, 
all drinking water must be disinfected. Chlorination 
is the preferred method for water disinfection in the 
field because it has a measurable residual, which both 
continues to kill organisms after initial treatment, and 
also serves as a sentinel for potential contamination 
627
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
TABLE 40-2
MINIMUM FREE AVAILABLE CHLORINE (RESIDUAL CHLORINE) LEVELS FOR VARIOUS FIELD 
APPLICATIONS
Application
Minimum FAC 
(mg/L or ppm)
Corrective Action 
ROWPU production 
2
FAC < 2 mg/L: Do not issue water, rechlorinate to FAC of 2 
mg/L, ensure FAC of 2 mg/L after 30 minutes prior to issue
Distribution /secondary storage
1
FAC 0. 2–1 mg/L: rechlorinate, ensure FAC of 1 mg/L, okay 
to issue 
FAC < 0. 2 mg/L: do not issue water, rechlorinate to 1 mg/L, 
ensure FAC of 1 mg/L after 30 minutes prior to issue
Unit-level storage (eg, water buffaloes, 
5-gallon containers)
1
FAC 0. 2–1 mg/L: rechlorinate to 1 mg/L, okay to issue
FAC < 0. 2 mg/L: do not issue water, rechlorinate to 1 mg/L, 
ensure FAC of 1 mg/L after 30 minutes prior to issue
Canteens, personal hydration systems
1
FAC < 0. 2 mg/L: rechlorinate to 1 mg/L, ensure FAC of 1 
mg/L after 30 minutes
Surface water (emergency only, no other 
treatment available) 
5
N/A
Ground water approved by preventive 
medicine staff
2
N/A
Nonpotable water for hygiene/showers
1
FAC < 1. 0: rechlorinate to 1 mg/L
FAC: free available chlorine; N/A: not applicable; ROWPU: reverse osmosis water purification unit
Data source: Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. Sanitary Control and Surveillance of Field Water Supplies. Washington, DC: DA; 
2010. TB Med 577.
when levels fall below acceptable thresholds. Chlorine 
requires a minimum of 30 minutes of contact time to 
disinfect water for drinking. Manufacturer information 
can provide specific dosing recommendations depending on the product used and the volume of water to 
be treated; however, concentration of dissolved solids, 
pH, and temperature can affect the volume of chlorine 
required to safely kill pathogens. The free available 
chlorine (FAC) indicates the amount of biologically 
active chlorine available to disinfect water intended for 
drinking. Table 40-2 outlines minimum FAC concentrations for various water systems and uses. 
In operational or deployed settings, water quality 
measurements including FAC, coliform testing, and 
a variety of other parameters should be regularly 
tested and recorded in accordance with tri-service 
recommendations. Table 40-3 outlines minimum FAC 
and testing periodicity for a variety of water systems 
commonly used in field conditions. Any concerns regarding water quality should be immediately reported 
to engineering personnel for remediation. 
Commercial bottled water is increasingly available in modern military operations. All bottled water 
products require testing and approval by trained US 
Army Veterinary Services (VS) personnel prior to use. 
VS maintains an up-to-date list of approved bottled 
water sources, published in the Worldwide Directory of Sanitarily Approved Food Establishments for 
Armed Forces procurement. 28 Preventive medicine 
personnel can extend expiration dates of bottled water 
in 30-day increments after testing to ensure continued 
potability.
FOOD STANDARDS
Foodborne illness imposes a substantial burden of 
morbidity, mortality, and time lost from work in both 
garrison and deployed settings. The most common 
factors contributing to foodborne illness include food 
from unsafe sources, poor personal hygiene, inadequate cooking, and inadequate holding temperatures. 29 
Specific interventions and best practices addressing 
each of these factors can minimize the likelihood of 
foodborne illness.
Assuring a safe food supply begins with procuring 
food from safe sources. Installation commanders are 
ultimately responsible for ensuring food and beverages on installations are served only through establishments inspected and approved by the relevant 
628
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 40-3
RECOMMENDED WATER QUALITY TESTING FREQUENCIES
Application
Residual Chlorine
Coliform 
pH
Total Dissolved 
Solids
ROWPU
Every 30 minutes during production 
operations
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Distribution/storage
With every receipt and distribution
Monthly
Monthly
Unit-level storage (eg, water buffaloes, 
5-gallon containers)
Twice daily
Weekly
Daily
Bottled/packaged field water
Monthly
Field showers
Time of delivery and twice daily
Food services
With each meal
ROWPU: reverse osmosis water purification unit; -: not applicable
Data source: Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. Sanitary Control and Surveillance of Field Water Supplies. Washington, DC: DA; 
2010. TB Med 577.
service-specific regulatory authority. While Meals, 
Ready-to-Eat (MREs) are specifically engineered to 
provide safe nutrition in unforgiving environments, 
service members frequently consume high-risk food 
from unapproved sources when given the opportunity. 
Frequent counseling as well as increased availability 
of additional approved and inspected on-installation 
food sources (if tactically feasible) are potential countermeasures to discourage high-risk consumption 
from unapproved food sources.
Inadequate hygiene, particularly hand hygiene, is 
frequently identified as a factor contributing to outbreaks of foodborne illness. Food handlers are required 
to receive specific training in hand hygiene techniques, 
as well as actions or events throughout the food 
preparation and serving process that require repeated 
washing. Hand hygiene is similarly important for food 
consumers. MMOs are strongly encouraged to ensure 
handwashing stations or hand sanitizer dispensers are 
available and promoted for use at installation dining 
and toileting facilities. 
Food handlers must be free of communicable 
diseases and are required to report symptoms of 
potential illness (such as vomiting, diarrhea, nausea, 
jaundice, skin lesions, or sore throat with fever) to 
their supervisor. A low threshold for exclusion from 
work should be applied to food handlers to minimize 
the possibility of foodborne illness resulting from a 
communicable disease. Food handlers with diagnosed 
norovirus, hepatitis A, shigellosis, enterohemorrhagic 
or Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli, or Salmonella 
typhi must be excluded from work and reported to 
the service-specific regulatory authority. Similarly, 
food handlers with known or suspected contact with 
individuals diagnosed with these conditions should 
also be reported and evaluated by medical personnel.
Proper cooking temperatures destroy pathogenic 
organisms and minimize potential for foodborne illness. Raw animal foods must be cooked to a temperature and for a time period that comply with the TriService Food Code29 based on the type of food product 
as well as method of preparation. Temperatures must 
be verified with a thermometer; visual inspection is not 
an adequate means of determining compliance with 
minimum temperature recommendations. 
To facilitate feeding large numbers of service members in a fixed amount of time, large dining facilities 
rely on stored food products prepared in bulk earlier 
in the day. Once cooked to a proper temperature, 
food must be stored hot or cold at an appropriate 
temperature to prohibit growth of pathogenic organisms. Maximum holding times vary by food product, 
holding temperature, and preparation style. Improper 
holding temperature or excessive holding time has 
been linked to countless foodborne illness outbreaks 
in cafeteria-style dining settings. 
WASTE DISPOSAL
Military field operations generate large amounts 
of waste products. Waste products may contain infectious agents such as cholera or typhoid, attract vermin 
capable of spreading zoonotic disease, or serve as 
breeding grounds for many vectors of human disease. 
As tactical conditions permit, waste should be collected 
629
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
and disposed of in accordance with local, federal, or 
host nation law. Increasingly, modern military operations rely on contracted services for collection and 
disposal of waste; however, such services may not be 
available for geographically isolated forward operating 
positions. As a result, MMOs must be familiar with 
basic principles of human, solid, and liquid waste 
management in operational settings and ensure waste 
management is addressed in the planning stages of 
any operation.
Methods employed for the disposal of human waste 
are influenced by material availability, soil conditions, 
source and location of drinking water, and environmental regulations. Positioning of toilet facilities 
should reduce or minimize the transmission of disease 
by vermin, vectors, or direct human contact. In general, field toilet facilities should be located at least 100 
feet from natural water sources, 100 yards from food 
service areas, and 50 feet from berthing. 30 All attempts 
should be made to create handwashing stations at the 
exit of any human waste facility; hand washing with 
soap and water is ideal, but hand sanitizer is an acceptable alternative. While contracted chemical toilets are 
generally preferred whenever possible, logistic and 
geographic realities of conflict sometimes necessitate 
field-expedient solutions to managing human waste.
Pit latrines are the simplest form of human waste 
disposal; however, their practicality is influenced by 
soil conditions and water table depth. Hard or rocky 
soil can make digging pit latrines difficult. A shallow 
water table can result in contamination of natural water sources and restrict the maximum depth to which 
a latrine can be dug. Pit latrines also require periodic 
treatment with appropriate insecticides to prevent 
vector breeding. Once the contents of the latrine reach 
1 foot from ground level, pit latrines should be closed 
and filled in with earth. 30
Burn-barrel latrines utilize 55-gallon drums cut in 
half to collect and burn human waste. Prior to use or 
re-use, a barrel is primed with approximately 3 inches 
of diesel fuel to ensure more efficient burning of solid 
waste; the fuel also serves as an insect repellant. Barrels 
must be burned when more than half full. A mixture 
of four parts diesel to one part gasoline should completely cover the barrel contents. Occasional stirring 
of the ignited contents is necessary (although less so 
with use of priming fuel). Minimizing the urine content 
of burn barrels greatly improves the efficiency of the 
burn and reduces fuel requirements. 
Solid waste generated in operational environments 
is disposed of through burial, incineration, or commercial hauling. Burial is suitable only for short-term 
activities (1 week or less) involving small numbers of 
persons. While commercial hauling and disposal is 
greatly preferred, tactical or host nation limitations often necessitate incineration of waste on site. Open burn 
pits are convenient for use when establishing bases; 
however, they should be replaced with incinerators as 
soon as practical due to the inherent health risks associated with unimproved combustion of solid waste. 31 
Waste water generated from field or operational 
activities must be disposed of in accordance with 
applicable local, federal, and host nation laws. Use 
of municipal sanitary sewers is preferred, but sewers 
are often unavailable in austere settings. When necessary, soakage pits and evaporation beds may be used 
to dispose of waste water without attracting vermin 
or serving as breeding pools for vectors. Soakage pits 
are simply pits filled with a coarse medium such as 
crushed gravel. Pits may become clogged or saturated 
over time, requiring the construction of additional 
pits. Evaporation beds are contained fields of earth 
groomed into rows of depressions and ridges similar 
to agricultural beds. The field is flooded to the top of 
the ridges and waste water is allowed to penetrate 
the soil and evaporate. A series of evaporation beds 
are used on a rotating basis to allow approximately 3 
days of evaporation prior to next use.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
Environmental exposures present a variety of public 
health challenges, particularly in the field environment. Extremes of temperature, altitude, precipitation, and sun exposure are routinely experienced in 
operational settings. For deployed forces, the need to 
maintain a combat-ready posture further exacerbates 
environmental stressors common to austere environments. Chapter 22, Environmental Extremes: Heat 
and Cold, discusses environmental hazards specific 
to military operations, as well as potential countermeasures available to MMOs for ensuring the health 
of military forces.
UNIT-LEVEL MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE
Medical surveillance, the continuous and systematic collection of health-related data, performs several 
critical functions. Medical surveillance is descriptive; 
that is, it provides an objective description of a population’s health at a point in time and thus identifies the 
basic epidemiology of a particular health problem. 
630
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 40-1. Sample disease and injury reporting worksheet.
Reproduced from: Office of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff. Procedures for Deployment Health Surveillance. Washington, 
DC: JCS; November 2, 2007: C-B-1. https://www.dcms.uscg.mil/Portals/10/CG-1/cg112/cg1121/docs/pdf/MCM-0028-07.pdf. 
Accessed June 8, 2018.
631
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
Surveillance is also predictive; that is, it helps explain 
variation in population health based on historical 
patterns and can serve as an early warning system for 
impending population health emergencies. Surveillance is informative; that is, the information obtained 
allows MMOs to provide commanders with specific 
preventive recommendations based on demonstrable 
trends in disease. Finally, surveillance is evaluative; 
when implementing a disease control measure, an 
ongoing surveillance system affords the opportunity to 
critically evaluate the impact of an intervention, track 
progress, and identify population health priorities for 
policy makers. 32
The simplest form of operational medical surveillance occurs at the individual provider level. All 
services require mandatory disease reporting for 
specific conditions via appropriate service-specific 
channels. 33–35 Additionally, state-mandated reportable medical conditions must also be reported to local 
health departments in accordance with service-specific 
instruction. 36
Historically, unit-level surveillance was most frequently accomplished in weekly reporting of disease 
and injury (D&I) information. Pen and paper D&I 
reporting has largely been replaced by automatic 
mining of electronic health records and laboratory 
data for conditions of significance in the majority of 
deployed and operational settings. In the most austere 
environments where electronic health records are unavailable, weekly pen and paper D&I reporting is still 
employed, using a reporting form such as that shown 
in Figure 40-1.
OUTBREAK INVESTIGATIONS
An outbreak is the occurrence of disease at a rate 
that exceeds expected baseline values. Every outbreak 
represents a systematic breakdown of public health 
infrastructure that warrants investigation. Outbreak 
investigations are performed to identify and treat those 
exposed, expose gaps in public health measures, and 
identify interventions to interrupt transmission and 
prevent further cases. Outbreak investigations are 
often complex and multidisciplinary, and can involve 
multiple agencies or organizations. In deployed or operational settings, military providers may be tasked to 
perform outbreak investigations with little specialized 
training or logistic assistance. 
While no two outbreaks are the same, employing 
a systematic method for investigation substantially 
increases the likelihood of successfully interrupting 
transmission of disease. In general, outbreak investigations consist of the following components: 
 
• Identify team and resources.
 
• Establish existence of an outbreak.
 
• Construct a case definition. 
 
• Systematically find cases and develop a line 
listing.
 
• Perform descriptive epidemiology.
 
• Evaluate transmission hypothesis.
 
• Implement control measures.
 
• Communicate findings.
 
• Maintain surveillance.
Each component is discussed below. While these 
components are often presented in a stepwise manner, investigators are not required to rigidly perform 
an outbreak investigation one step at a time. It is often 
necessary (and advisable) to perform several tasks 
simultaneously to ensure expeditious interruption of 
disease as well as alleviate public fears surrounding 
an outbreak. 
Identify Team and Resources 
At first notification of a potential outbreak, an 
investigator must assess the personnel and material 
resources at their disposal to provide an adequate 
response. Personnel with specific outbreak investigation and public health training or prior experience 
are particularly valuable resources to consider when 
assembling a team. Local and regional civilian health 
departments are a wealth of knowledge and experience 
when conducting outbreak investigations. When the 
magnitude of the outbreak clearly indicates locally 
available resources are not sufficient, service-specific 
public health assistance may be available from the regional Navy environmental preventive medicine unit, 
the US Army Public Health Command, or the US Air 
Force School of Aerospace Medicine. 
Establish the Existence of an Outbreak 
Routine disease surveillance provides the historical 
context for helping public health officials determine the 
rates of disease that constitute expected baseline values. 
Geography, seasonal weather variation, animal migratory 
patterns, and movement of human populations are some 
factors that influence expected values of disease incidence. 
Certain diseases are considered outbreaks based on a 
single occurrence (inhalational anthrax, human rabies, 
smallpox), while others may require dozens or hundreds 
of cases prior to exceeding expected background levels 
(gastroenteritis, upper respiratory infections). 
632
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
On occasion investigators may be notified of a spurious increase in the number of reported cases of disease 
that initially appears to represent an outbreak. “Pseudo 
outbreaks” typically occur as the result of changing 
surveillance methodology (such as a new, more sensitive case definition) or other factors unrelated to the 
disease in question. 
Construct a Case Definition 
Crafting a meaningful case definition is a critical 
step in conducting an outbreak investigation. Case 
definitions that are too restrictive will lack sensitivity 
in identifying persons with the condition of interest. Conversely, case definitions that are too broadly 
defined will result in inefficient use of resources as 
investigators identify and interview more individuals than necessary. A good case definition contains 
aspects of exposure, symptoms, and temporality to 
focus investigation efforts on those individuals most 
likely to represent people truly affected by the disease 
or illness in question. As the investigation progresses 
and patterns of exposures and symptoms become 
more apparent, the team may choose to modify the 
case definition to be more or less inclusive.
Systematically Find Cases and Develop a Line 
Listing 
Once a case definition is developed, the team is 
tasked with systematically collecting information from 
potentially affected persons. Investigators often develop 
a standardized questionnaire or data collection sheet to 
survey potential cases for information regarding exposures, symptoms, and temporality pertinent to the case 
definition. Using standardized questionnaires helps 
minimize information bias and allows for the same 
information to be collected from all potential contacts. 
0
5
10
15
20
Number of Cases
1
30
Time
Exposure
Figure 40-2. Point source outbreak epidemiologic curve with hypothetical data. Point source outbreaks are characterized by 
a single common exposure and rapid resolution. Incubation period can be determined by calculating the time elapsed from 
exposure to the majority of cases developing symptoms. Outliers can be helpful in further establishing causative etiology, 
particularly in outbreaks of foodborne illness when consumption of leftovers results in individual cases occurring outside 
the bulk of those affected.
633
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
Individual contact questionnaire or interview data are 
most often transcribed into a line listing, which is a 
comprehensive database detailing patient identification, demographic, exposure, symptom, laboratory, 
and outcome data. In cases of known diseases with 
historically well-described risk factors and symptoms, 
the line listing may be truncated to include only the 
most relevant data needed to perform an investigation. 
For investigations of an unidentified agent, exposure, or 
cluster of seemingly unrelated symptoms, line listings 
will often contain far greater amounts of information.
Perform Descriptive Epidemiology 
Information contained in a line listing allows investigators to explore how particular demographics 
and exposures influence disease status. In investigations in which the etiology of illness is unknown, 
describing basic demographic information about the 
population or cohort demonstrating an increased 
risk of becoming ill is a crucial first step in identifying the causative agent of disease. Line listings also 
afford investigators the opportunity to calculate attack rates (the percentage of individuals who become 
ill after a discrete exposure). Calculating the attack 
rate ratio (the attack rate in exposed persons divided 
by the attack rate in unexposed persons) for each 
exposure allows investigators to identify exposures 
most strongly associated with disease. Focusing 
further laboratory and epidemiologic investigation 
on exposures with the largest attack rate ratios most 
efficiently utilizes the limited time and resources 
available to investigators. 
Evaluate Transmission Hypothesis 
Line listings are also valuable in compiling data on 
the symptoms of those affected by the disease in quesFigure 40-3. Continuous common source outbreak epidemiologic curve with hypothetical data. Continuous common source 
outbreaks are characterized by a persistent exposure. Rapid accumulation of cases after initial exposure and large numbers 
of new cases throughout the outbreak suggest a common community source of exposure (eg, contaminated water or manufactured food product). If an intervention to interrupt transmission of disease is successful, abrupt cessation can be expected 
approximately one incubation period after last exposure.
0
5
10
15
20
Number of Cases
1
30
Time
Exposure
Intervention
634
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
tion. In creating a basic epidemiologic (or “epi”) curve 
(a bar graph depicting the number of cases by the date 
or time of symptom onset), investigators can develop 
a hypothesis about how the illness is transmitted. 
Point source outbreaks result when a single common 
exposure is responsible for transmitting illness during 
a restricted period of time, such as food poisoning resulting from Salmonella contained in a dish at potluck 
luncheon (Figure 40-2). Continuous common source 
transmission occurs when persons are exposed to 
the same source over a prolonged period of time. Illness resulting from environmental exposures or from 
widely distributed manufactured food products are 
examples of continuous common source outbreaks 
(Figure 40-3). Propagated spread outbreaks occur as a 
result of human-to-human transmission and are typically characterized by clusters of patients separated by 
the incubation time required for a particular illness. 
Investigations involving vaccine-preventable illnesses 
are classic examples of propagated spread outbreaks 
(Figure 40-4).
Epi curves contain a wealth of additional information. By examining the lag between time of exposure 
and onset of symptoms, or by investigating the lapse 
of time between clusters of cases, investigators can 
estimate incubation periods and therefore narrow the 
list of potential causative agents. Epi curves graphically 
display the current trajectory or magnitude of the outbreak. Epi curves also allow for easy identification of 
outliers—potential sentinel cases standing apart from 
the remaining population. 
 Implement Control Measures
Investigators need not wait for definitive identification of a causative agent prior to implementing 
meaningful control measures. Suspected outbreaks of 
gastrointestinal or respiratory illness warrant immediate public health messaging to increase hand hygiene 
and social distancing of ill or coughing persons, respectively. Similarly, if a toxic or harmful exposure is 
suspected to be the root cause of an outbreak, efforts 
0
5
10
15
20
Number of Cases
1
30
Time
Figure 40-4. Propagated spread epidemiologic curve with hypothetical data. Propagated spread outbreaks are characterized 
by clusters of new cases temporally segregated by approximately one incubation period. This pattern of disease outbreak 
strongly suggests human-to-human transmission of disease.
635
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
to mitigate exposure should be implemented as soon 
as practical instead of waiting for final confirmation 
of the exact substance responsible.
Implementation of control measures goes beyond 
simple removal of the offending agent. Because outbreaks represent a systematic breakdown of public 
health infrastructure, it is necessary to reevaluate existing systems or develop new systematic processes to 
assure public health. The epi curve can be a helpful tool 
for visualizing the potential impact of an intervention 
because the trajectory of cases is anticipated to decline 
after implementation of a meaningful control measure.
Communicate Findings 
Good risk communication is paramount to the successful interruption of disease transmission and should 
occur at all stages of the outbreak investigation. It is 
not enough for investigators to swiftly interrupt transmission of disease, they must also strive to keep faith 
with relevant stakeholders in providing timely and 
factual information to maintain public trust. Providing early and sustained risk communication alleviates 
fears and supports partnership between investigators, 
authorities, and the general public. Such partnerships 
often result in greater cooperation and more speedy 
resolution of outbreaks. The value of regularly communicating findings throughout all stages of the contact investigation cannot be over-emphasized. Specific 
principles and strategies for risk communication are 
provided later in this chapter. 
Maintain Surveillance 
After successfully implementing control measures, 
monitoring for additional cases remains necessary. 
Outlier populations may continue to experience exposure to the offending agent and serve as additional 
opportunities to eliminate transmission. Surveillance 
remains a critical component of outbreak investigations long after the final cases are identified. By its 
most basic definition, an outbreak is the occurrence 
of disease at a rate that exceeds expected baseline values. Continued disease surveillance provides baseline 
values to determine if future occurrences constitute 
an outbreak.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Though emergency preparedness is ultimately the 
responsibility of the commander, all personnel must 
take an active ownership role in ensuring their unit 
remains prepared for an emergency. Medical departments play a critical role in developing, testing, and 
executing a commander’s emergency preparedness 
plan. Comprehensive emergency planning is not 
restricted to active duty military forces; catastrophic 
events also affect service member families, host nation personnel, and displaced populations. Properly 
conducted emergency management includes identification of all potentially affected individuals in the 
area of operations, as well as coordination of planning and response efforts with local, county, state, or 
national stakeholder organizations. The complexity 
of such relationships dictates the frequency and scale 
of planning exercises that should be performed prior 
to a disaster. The importance of stakeholder rehearsal 
exercises for preserving life in disasters cannot be overstated. No substitute exists for drilling side-by-side 
with stakeholder partners to identify strengths and 
vulnerabilities of a potential unified disaster response. 
Preparation and Planning: “All Hazards” Approach 
Successful emergency plans are scalable for any 
size of event and flexible enough to effectively address any variety of disaster. “All-hazards” disaster 
planning is the most widely used approach because 
it is sufficiently scalable and flexible. The all-hazards 
approach identifies four phases of disaster management operations to simplify the planning process: 
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. 37 
Mitigation actions create lasting risk reductions 
from hazardous events by reducing known or potential 
vulnerabilities. Examples of mitigation measures range 
from maintaining a medically ready and vaccinated 
force to prevent the spread of communicable disease, 
to ensuring a medical treatment facility’s generators 
are housed in a location unlikely to be subjected to 
water damage from a flood or debris damage from an 
earthquake. Mitigation measures by their very nature 
build resilience into populations, communities, and 
the built environment to lessen potential damage from 
catastrophic events. 
 Preparedness involves establishing authorities and 
responsibilities for emergency actions and adequately 
maintaining the necessary assets to support such 
actions. During the preparedness phase of disaster 
response, support staff roles are clearly defined and 
assigned, physical supplies are procured and maintained, and contingency operations for day-to-day 
activities are developed and rehearsed. Critical but 
often neglected tasks during the preparedness phase 
include cross-training responders to perform the tasks 
of missing or injured team members and developing 
636
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
alternative physical work spaces in the event a primary 
workspace is compromised.
The medical response to a disaster is frequently the 
most time-sensitive component of an emergency preparedness plan. Communication is critically important 
during the response phase of disaster management; 
MMOs should have direct communication to the disaster command and control team or the emergency 
operations center (EOC). Through the EOC, medical 
departments receive casualty information, request 
transportation and supplies, and provide command 
with information critical for tasking precious resources.
The recovery phase transitions a community back to 
normal daily functioning. Documentation and surveillance of unique exposures from the disaster, long-term 
care for the injured, and assessment of successful and 
unsuccessful actions performed during the disaster 
occur in the recovery phase. It is absolutely necessary 
to use the recovery phase to reflect on the actions and 
results of the emergency response. Recovery should 
be used to recognize and incorporate future mitigation 
measures and response improvements based upon 
the successes and challenges of the disaster response.
Military-Specific Emergency Management 
Resources
Commanders and MMOs have a variety of assets 
available to assist with planning, executing, and managing disaster response and public health emergencies. 
Within the continental United States, every military 
installation commander has designated a public health 
emergency officer (PHEO) by name. PHEOs have specialized training and expertise to provide commanders 
and MMOs with guidance and recommendations on 
preparing for, declaring, responding to, mitigating, 
and recovering from public health emergencies. Installations outside the continental US have a PHEO at 
each geographic combatant command headquarters.
The military treatment facility emergency manager 
(MEM) is a uniformed or civilian employee with specialized training and expertise essential to medical 
emergency management. MEMs are responsible for 
executing all-hazards emergency management activities on behalf of the commander, serving as the facility’s lead for military-civilian emergency management 
coordination as well as the primary point of contact to 
the installation emergency manager. 38 The MEM is the 
primary advocate for ensuring appropriate resource 
needs are identified to execute the mission of the medical department in an emergency. 
VS personnel are a vital and sometimes overlooked 
asset in public health emergency planning, training, 
and response. VS provides subject matter expertise 
for DoD installations and military commands for food 
safety and security, certain associated laboratory diagnostics, biosecurity, wildlife management, and vector 
control. Additionally, VS provides field operations 
support services including prevention and eradication of zoonotic disease, identification of potentially 
affected animals, animal quarantine implementation, 
euthanasia, carcass disposal, cleaning and disinfection, 
and strategic vaccinations and treatments for animals. 38 
Training and Exercise Participation 
Training is essential for emergency response personnel to become familiar with their responsibilities, 
acquire the skills necessary to perform assigned 
tasks, and identify potential vulnerabilities of a response plan. The MEM, PHEO, and regional health 
departments are often repositories of excellent planning resources for MMOs tasked with developing 
a departmental or unit emergency response plan. 
Regional health departments routinely offer workshops and training courses to promote and develop 
coordinated regional emergency response planning. 
At the national level, the Federal Emergency Management Agency supports state training efforts through 
its Emergency Management Institute, offers a variety 
of free online courses, and publicly releases major 
publications relating to planning for specific functions and hazards.
RISK COMMUNICATION
Communicating complex health information to lay 
persons is an essential skill for all MMOs. While most 
MMOs are comfortable providing discrete clinical 
counseling to individual patients, effective risk communication can be challenging due to multiple stakeholder involvement, presence of media, and the highvisibility nature of events requiring intervention. In 
many operational settings, junior MMOs are routinely 
relied upon as the subject matter expert for all issues 
pertaining to unit health. The ability to effectively 
communicate complex health information factually, 
reliably, and empathetically has a significant impact 
on mission success. 
Routine health promotion is an ideal opportunity for MMOs to develop risk communication skills. 
Whether combating tobacco use, low vaccination uptake, or high sexually transmitted infection incidence, 
the cognitive process employed to reach a vulnerable 
637
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
audience remains the same. To change an unhealthy 
behavior, an audience must: (1) receive information, 
(2) understand the information, (3) understand the 
message applies to them, (4) understand they are at 
risk if they do not take protective action, (5) decide 
they need to act on information, (6) understand what 
actions need to be taken, and (7) be able to take action. 39 
Effective risk communication increases the chance an 
audience will listen and adhere to sound recommendations (Exhibit 40-2). 
Principles of Health Risk Communication
The occurrence of an outbreak, disaster, or other 
event with the capacity to affect significant numbers 
of people creates an urgent demand for information 
among the population affected. Effective risk communication builds upon the health belief model, a framework for explaining and predicting health behaviors 
by directly addressing an audience’s perception of susceptibility, severity, benefits of taking action, barriers 
to taking action, cues to action, and self-efficacy. 40 Risk 
messaging should be simple, credible, and consistent. 
Messages should be repeated often through multiple 
communication and media avenues and conveyed by 
a variety of credible sources (subject matter experts, 
commanders, elected officials, community leaders). 
The six key principles of risk communication provide a 
systematic approach to conveying factual information 
and increasing the likelihood of positively impacting 
the health of the public. 41
Be First 
Good risk communication occurs early and often. 
Technology has vastly expanded the availability 
and speed at which audiences can obtain information. MMOs should be prepared to communicate 
risk information quickly and often, or they can 
expect their target audience to receive information 
elsewhere. Identification and inclusion of all stakeholders when communicating is essential; groups 
left out of initial risk messaging may feel forgotten 
or purposefully ignored, resulting in a substantially 
greater amount of future efforts required in order 
to regain their trust. 
Be Right 
The content of a risk communication message must 
be factual and verifiable. Good risk communication 
openly acknowledges when data are uncertain or 
unknown. Speculation is strongly discouraged; messages instead should clearly state what is known and 
what steps are being taken to investigate current gaps 
in knowledge. 
Be Credible
Honesty and integrity serve as the foundation on 
which a trusting relationship is built. Audiences accept 
limitations of knowledge but are wholly unforgiving 
of deception. Experienced risk communicators defer 
EXHIBIT 40-2
RISK COMMUNICATION EXAMPLES
Even brief risk communication statements conveying factual information have the potential to convey unintended 
content. Consider the following responses to a hypothetical scenario in which two sailors have been hospitalized 
and diagnosed with Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) while on overnight liberty in a 
foreign port. 
Example A. “Regretfully, arrival of MERS-CoV in your town was probably not preventable. We are evacuating our sailors 
from your hospital to prevent further exposures. We have cooperated with local health officials and provided them our sailors’ 
itineraries so exposed local nationals can be identified.”
Example B. “We are very sorry the community has been exposed to this virus; had there been any indication our sailors were 
sick we would not have granted liberty. We are working closely with local public health officials to identify those in the community who were exposed and limit further spread of this virus in the community.”
Example A somewhat dismisses the importance of the event, conveys a sense the military will leave as quickly 
as possible, and strikes a somewhat defensive tone. While the factual content conveyed is the same, the message 
conveyed in example B expresses empathy, stresses the value of working together as partners, and reinforces the 
idea of community.
638
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
to subject matter experts to answer questions beyond 
their area of expertise, and in doing so, bolster their 
credibility as an honest communicator. 
Express Empathy 
A crisis generates physical as well as psychological 
harm. Openly acknowledging the suffering of those 
impacted and those who remain in potential danger 
builds trust and rapport. Expressing empathy engages 
an audience so they are more receptive to hear a message and provides an opportunity to communicate 
those common threads of humanity that bind communities together. 
Promote Action 
Effective risk communication empowers audiences 
with actionable knowledge. Providing easily implemented recommendations gives the public something 
to do, calms anxiety, and restores a sense of personal 
control. A message as simple as, “Avoid handshakes 
and use hand sanitizer frequently,” contains evidencebased, factual information that allows the public to be 
part of the solution.
Show Respect 
Individuals within a community will demonstrate 
substantial variability in how they perceive the same 
risk. Some individuals will be deeply affected by a crisis and feel vulnerable and wronged. Showing respect 
through communicating in a way that acknowledges 
perceptions of vulnerability builds trust and promotes 
cooperation.
Perception of Risk
Perception of risk is highly subjective and intensely 
personal; however, certain characteristics of risk substantially influence how a particular threat is perceived 
by the public at large. Recognizing historical patterns 
in how individuals and communities assess risk can 
help planners anticipate the response expected from 
the public and aid in shaping a risk communication 
message. 41
Familiarity 
Populations exposed to a recurrent risk often become desensitized despite the continued threat posed 
from exposure. “Routine” risks are far more readily 
accepted than the exotic. While seasonal influenza is 
widely circulated among the public and is responsible 
for thousands of deaths in the United States on an 
annual basis, many choose not to be immunized. In 
contrast, a single case of an exotic virus in a healthcare 
worker confined to isolation has the ability to evoke 
an incredible amount of public concern and demand 
for government intervention. 
Natural Versus Manmade 
Populations are generally far more tolerant of 
natural disasters than those resulting from human 
activities, even though the former are no less traumatic. Communities often accept the risk of living and 
building in disaster-prone geographic areas; however, 
mishaps resulting from an industrial process or failed 
product of engineering are widely viewed as entirely 
preventable. 
Distribution 
People generally are more accepting of a risk that 
is equally distributed among the population at large 
versus exposures disproportionately concentrated to 
a defined group or population. Concentrated risks can 
evoke feelings of inequality and injustice, particularly 
when such exposures result entirely from an anthropogenic process or involve already disadvantaged or 
vulnerable communities.
Reputation 
Prior performance is the strongest predictor of 
future performance. Institutions that have built social 
capital with a populace have reputations affording 
substantially greater leeway in responding to a crisis 
in comparison to untrusted or frankly unpopular institutions. Disreputable institutions suffer an additional 
burden of past transgressions (perceived or genuine) 
when responding to a crisis. 
Adults Versus Children
Communities worldwide are rightly protective of 
their children. Exposures or illnesses disproportionately concentrated in pediatric populations can evoke 
a particularly volatile reaction, necessitating a robust 
and empathetic response to preserve public trust. 
Avoiding Pitfalls
Risk communication requires practice. Mistakes 
are often public, and recovery is difficult. The single 
greatest mistake an MMO can make in performing 
risk communication is attempting to accomplish the 
639
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
task alone. Vetting risk communication messages 
through multiple stakeholders creates a much stronger product, protects against misinterpretation or 
misrepresentation of information, contributes to unity 
of effort in ensuring the right message is conveyed, 
and minimizes opportunities for public disagreement 
among leadership and subject matter experts. At an 
absolute minimum, DoD regulations mandate public 
statements to be cleared for release by the command 
public affairs officer (PAO). PAOs receive specialized 
training on communicating with the media and the 
public. They have a wealth of practical knowledge to 
assist in crafting and delivering a message that is effective and in accordance with the values represented 
by the armed forces. 
The importance of selecting an appropriate spokesperson to deliver a risk communication message is 
equally important as the message itself. An expertly 
crafted message is irrecoverably compromised when 
delivered by a spokesperson of dubious credentials 
or questionable character, or who lacks empathy 
or expresses inappropriate humor. The selection of 
stakeholder and subject matter expert partners also 
sways public opinion; many communities will form 
an initial assessment of the competence of a crisis response based on who they see sitting next to the risk 
communication spokesperson before a single word of 
a message is delivered. 41
While the psychological damage of an event or 
exposure may not manifest as readily as physical destruction, emotional trauma significantly influences an 
audience’s receptiveness to information, and outrage 
should not be dismissed. For this reason specifically, 
humor has no place in risk communication because 
its use is nearly always interpreted as callousness 
and disrespect. 41 Lastly, overtly expressing desired 
outcomes is acceptable; however, promises should be 
confined to areas within absolute control. 39 A promise 
to “ensure no further spread of the disease” is likely 
impossible; instead, assurances such as “the team will 
work nonstop to slow further spread of this disease” 
are reasonably accomplishable.
SUMMARY
Countless examples are found throughout history 
when communicable disease profoundly influenced 
the effectiveness of military forces. Maintaining the 
health and readiness of service members by preventing illnesses common in the deployed environment 
is critical for preserving force strength and accomplishing the mission. Medical staff must be able to 
recognize public health threats and be prepared to 
implement meaningful control measures. Additionally, medical staff must be prepared to respond to 
public health emergencies by effectively communicating disease risk and mitigation strategies to all 
stakeholders, from the command staff to individual 
service members.
REFERENCES
 
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ten great public health achievements—United States, 1900–1999. https://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00056796.htm. Published 1999. Accessed June 6, 2018.
 
2. UNICEF. Vaccines bring 7 diseases under control. http://www.unicef.org/pon96/hevaccin.htm. Accessed April 13, 
2015.
 
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. History and epidemiology of global smallpox eradication. https://stacks.
cdc.gov/view/cdc/27929. Published 2014. Accessed June 6, 2018.
 
4. Defense Health Agency Immunization Healthcare Branch. Vaccine recommendations by AOR. https://health.
mil/Military-Health-Topics/Health-Readiness/Immunization-Healthcare/Vaccine-Recommendations/VaccineRecommendations-by-AOR. Published 2018. Accessed June 6, 2018.
 
5. Departments of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Coast Guard. Immunizations and Chemoprophylaxis for the Prevention 
of Infectious Diseases. Washington, DC: DoD; October 7, 2013. Army Regulation 40–562, BUMEDINST 6230. 15B, AFI 
48–110_IP, CG COMDTINST M6230. 4G.
 
6. Magill AJ. For the record: a history of malaria chemoprophylaxis. In: Brunette GW, Kozarsky PE, Cohen NJ, et al, eds. 
CDC Health Information for International Travel 2014. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2014.
640
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
7. Whitman TJ, Coyne PE, Magill AJ, et al. An outbreak of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in U.S. Marines deployed to 
Liberia. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010;83(2):258–265. doi:10. 4269/ajtmh. 2010. 09-0774.
 
8. Pellerin C. DOD mefloquine policy mirrors FDA Update on malaria drug. http://archive.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.
aspx?id=120857. Published September 26, 2013. Accessed May 30, 2018.
 
9. Brisson M, Brisson P. Compliance with antimalaria chemoprophylaxis in a combat zone. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 
2012;86(4):587–590. 
 10. Takafuji ET, Kirkpatrick JW, Miller RN, et al. An efficacy trial of doxycycline chemoprophylaxis against leptospirosis. 
N Engl J Med. 1984;310(8):497–500. 
 11. Brett-Major DM, Lipnick RJ. Antibiotic prophylaxis for leptospirosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(3):CD007342. 
 12. Aldous WK, Robertson JL, Robinson BJ, et al. Rates of gonorrhea and chlamydia in U.S. military personnel deployed 
to Iraq and Afghanistan (2004-2009). Mil Med. 2011;176(6):705–710.
 13. Garges E, Holmes K, MacDonald M. Emerging issues in sexually transmitted diseases: focus on the treatment of STDs 
in military populations. Webinar presented March 27, 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/military-webinarslides.pdf. Published 2013. Accessed April 13, 2015.
 14. Christopher LA, Miller L. Women in war: operational issues of menstruation and unintended pregnancy. Mil Med. 
2007;172(1):9–16.
 15. Colthirst PM, Berg RG, DeNicolo P, Simecek JW. Operational cost analysis of dental emergencies for deployed U.S. 
Army personnel during Operation Iraqi Freedom. Mil Med. 2013;178(4):427–431. doi:10. 7205/MILMED-D-12-00431.
 16. Wojcik BE, Szeszel-Fedorowicz W, Humphrey RJ, et al. Risk of dental disease non-battle injuries and severity of dental 
disease in deployed U.S. Army personnel. Mil Med. 2015;180(5):570–577. doi:10. 7205/MILMED-D-14-00364.
 17. Mahoney GD, Coombs M. A literature review of dental casualty rates. Mil Med. 2000;165(10):751–756. http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11050872. Accessed April 24, 2015.
 18. Githeko AK, Lindsay SW, Confalonieri UE, Patz JA. Climate change and vector-borne diseases: a regional analysis. 
Bull World Health Organ. 2000;78(9):1136–1147. doi:10. 1590/S0042-96862000000900009.
 19. Armed Forces Pest Management Board. Personal Protective Measures Against Insects and Other Arthropods of Military 
Significance. Silver Spring, MD: AFPMB; 2015. Technical Guide No. 36. https://www.acq.osd.mil/eie/afpmb/docs/
techguides/tg36.pdf. Accessed June 6, 2018.
 20. Nasci RS, Wirtz RA, Brogdon WG. Protection against mosquitoes, ticks, & other arthropods. In: CDC Health Information for International Travel 2016. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2016.
 21. Scheinfeld N. Picaridin: a new insect repellent. J Drugs Dermatol. 2013;3(1):59–60. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16040419.
 22. Imported human rabies in a U.S. Army soldier—New York, 2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61(17):302–305. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22552206. Accessed April 13, 2015.
 23. Webber BJ, Ayers KJ, Winterton BS, et al. Assessment of rabies exposure risk in a group of U.S. Air Force basic 
trainees—Texas, January 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(34):749–752. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25166925. Accessed April 13, 2015.
 24. Woodson J. Human Rabies Prevention During and After Deployment. Washington, DC: Assistant Secretary of Defense for 
Health Affairs; November 14, 2011.
 25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Rabies, preexposure vaccinations. http://www.cdc.gov/rabies/specific_
groups/travelers/pre-exposure_vaccinations.html. Published April 22, 2011. Accessed April 13, 2015.
641
Preventive Medicine in the Deployed Environment
 26. Rupprecht CE, Briggs D, Brown CM, et al. Use of a reduced (4-dose) vaccine schedule for postexposure prophylaxis 
to prevent human rabies: recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices. MMWR Recomm 
Rep. 2010;59(RR-2):1–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20300058. Accessed April 13, 2015.
 27. Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. Sanitary Control and Surveillance of Field Water Supplies. Washington, 
DC: DA; 2010. TB Med 577.
 28. US Army Public Health Center. Worldwide directory of sanitarily approved food establishments for armed forces 
procurement. http://phc.amedd.army.mil/topics/foodwater/ca/Pages/DoDApprovedFoodSources.aspx. Updated March 
15, 2018. Accessed May 30, 2018.
 29. Department of the Army. Tri-Service Food Code. Washington, DC: HQDA; April 30, 2014. TB MED 530, NAVMED 
P-5010-1, AFMAN 48-147 IP. http://www.med.navy.mil/directives/Pub/5010-1.pdf. Accessed May 20, 2015.
 30. Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Preventive medicine for ground forces. In: Manual of Preventive Medicine. 
Washington, DC; BUMED; 1991: Chap 9. NAVMED P-5010-9. http://www.med.navy.mil/directives/Pub/5010-9.pdf. 
Accessed May 20, 2015.
 31. US Central Command. CENTCOM Contingency Environmental Guidance. Macdill Air Force Base, FL: CENTCOM; 2012. 
Regulation 200-2. https://www.cemml.colostate.edu/cultural/09476/pdf/CENTCOM_ITTR_CCR_200-2-1.pdf. Accessed 
June 6, 2018.
 32. World Health Organization. Public health surveillance. http://www.who.int/topics/public_health_surveillance/en/. 
Updated 2018. Accessed May 30, 2018.
 33. Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Medical Surveillance and Medical Event Reporting. Washington, DC: BUMED; 
September 27, 2011. BUMED Instruction 6220. 12C. http://www.med.navy.mil/directives/ExternalDirectives/6220. 12C.
pdf. Accessed May 20, 2015.
 34. Department of the Air Force. Surveillance, Prevention, and Control of Diseases and Conditions of Public Health or Military 
Significance. Washington, DC: DAF; July 15, 2014. Air Force Instruction 48-105. 
 35. Department of the Army. Preventive Medicine. Army Regulation 40-5. Washington, DC: DA; May 25, 2007. Army 
Regulation 40-5.
 36. Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center. Armed Forces Reportable Medical Events Guidelines and Case Definitions. 
Washington, DC: DHA; 2017. https://www.health.mil/Military-Health-Topics/Health-Readiness/Armed-Forces-HealthSurveillance-Branch/Reports-and-Publications. Accessed June 6, 2018.
 37. Federal Emergency Management Agency. Guide for All-Hazard Emergency Operations Planning. Washington, DC: FEMA; 
1996: 1-96.
 38. Department of Defense. Public Health Emergency Management within the Department of Defense. Washington, DC: DoD; 
October 2, 2013. DoD Instruction 6200. 03. 
 39. Glik DC. Risk Communication for public health emergencies. Annu Rev Public Health. 2007;28:33–54.
 40. Janz NK, Champion VL, Stretcher VJ. The health belief model. In: Glanz K, Rimer BK, Lewis FM, eds. Health Behavior 
and Health Education: Theory, Research, and Practice. 3rd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2002: 45–66.
 41. Reynolds B, Seeger M. Crisis and Emergency Risk Communication. 2nd ed. In: Cox J, Gaines-McCollom M, Grimsley N, 
et al, eds. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2014. https://emergency.cdc.gov/cerc/resources/
pdf/cerc_2014edition.pdf. Accessed April 17, 2015.
642
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
