573
 Combat and Operational Stress 
Chapter 37 
COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS 
CONTROL
JAMES C. WEST, MD,* and CHRISTOPHER H. WARNER, MD†
INTRODUCTION
PHYSIOLOGY AND PSYCHOLOGY OF HUMAN STRESS RESPONSE
COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESSES
RESILIENCY AND CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS AND UNITS
Individual Resilience and Vulnerability
Unit Resilience and Vulnerability
REACTIONS TO COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS
PRINCIPLES OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS ASSESSMENT
PRINCIPLES OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS CONTROL
MANAGEMENT OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS REACTIONS IN 
INDIVIDUALS
Psychotherapy in Theater
Medication Management in Theater
Restoration Centers
Management and Disposition of Severe Reactions and Psychiatric Illness
MANAGEMENT OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS REACTIONS IN 
UNITS—TRAUMATIC EVENT MANAGEMENT
SUMMARY
*Captain, Medical Corps, US Navy; Assistant Professor of Psychiatry, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
†Colonel, US Army Medical Corps; Psychiatry Consultant to The US Army Surgeon General, USA MEDDAC-Fort Stewart, Fort Stewart, Georgia
574
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
INTRODUCTION
Military operations are inherently stressful, whether 
due to the stress of combat or the more insidious 
operational stresses of the operating environment. 
Combat and operational stress control encompasses 
practices that promote individual and unit resilience 
and ameliorate negative stress reactions. Combat and 
operation stress control is the collective responsibility 
of all unit personnel. The unit military medical officer 
(MMO) plays a key role in enhancing leadership efforts in promoting unit resiliency. MMOs also have 
responsibility to evaluate and treat members impaired 
by combat and operational stress injuries. This chapter 
will provide an overview of fundamentals of combat 
and operational stress control for the unit MMO.
PHYSIOLOGY AND PSYCHOLOGY OF HUMAN STRESS RESPONSE
In order to understand the role of the MMO in promoting resilience and evaluating and treating combat 
and operational stress casualties, it is necessary to first 
consider fundamental principles behind the human 
stress response. The human stress response system 
functions to maintain homeostasis in the presence of 
external threats and environmental changes. It does so 
by causing protective behaviors such as “fight, flight, 
or freeze” in the face of a threat. The stress response 
system also promotes rapid recall of past threat information. Under extreme stress these reaction and recall 
systems can generate behaviors and symptoms out of 
proportion to the threat. 
The primary brain systems involved in stress 
response include the amygdala, hippocampus, and 
prefrontal cortex. 1 These regions all process sensory 
information, but do so in different ways and at different speeds. The amygdala receives direct sensory input 
from the thalamus and rapidly identifies threats. In 
the presence of threat, the amygdala generates signals 
for appropriate fight, flight, or freeze responses. The 
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex receive the same 
sensory information, but pathways to these brain 
areas are slower and designed to incorporate additional memory and context information. In healthy, 
non-stressed individuals these pathways modulate 
or inhibit amygdala response. Prolonged or extreme 
stress can shift the balance of the amygdala–prefrontal 
cortex–hippocampus system to produce a persistent 
threat response. In other words, the amygdala becomes 
hyperactive and the prefrontal cortex hypoactive and 
unable to sufficiently modulate the fight/flight/freeze 
response. An affected individual is hyperresponsive 
and less able to self-regulate stress responses. In the 
combat environment some hypervigilance and enhanced reactivity is typically adaptive, but excessive 
hyperarousal is impairing. 
A useful paradigm recently adopted by the Department of Defense is the Stress Response Continuum, 
shown in Figure 37-1. 2 This model places individual 
responses along a continuum of ready-reacting-injuredill. Ready individuals demonstrate effective coping and 
are adapting to any stress without significant distress 
or impairment. Under stress many individuals will 
demonstrate mild distress or impairment and would be 
considered otherwise healthy but reacting. Under significant stress, a percentage of individuals will go on to be 
injured, meaning that they experience possibly transient 
severe distress or impairment, but also are at significant 
risk for persisting negative alterations. Finally, some 
individuals may experience true illness under extreme 
stress and develop a mental disorder or diagnosis. This 
distinction is usually made after a significant period of 
impairment, arbitrarily about 60 days. 
COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESSES
Combat operations present a variety of stresses to 
deployed personnel. Direct exposure to killing and 
death are significant and psychologically toxic. 3 If 
the exposed individual experiences horror or helplessness, the exposure to killing and death becomes 
much more traumatic. Examples of severe exposures 
include witnessing fellow soldiers burn to death in a 
vehicle and being helpless to intervene; close proximity 
to the sudden death of a teammate, as in an improvised explosive device blast; or engagement in which 
troops find themselves outnumbered or defenseless. 
Handling human remains or cleaning blood and 
brains from vehicles or buildings are also potentially 
traumatic events. The act of killing enemy combatants 
is potentially traumatic, and inadvertent killing of 
noncombatants even more so. Patrolling or defending 
in a sustained and unpredictable threat environment 
even in the absence of killing can generate severe or 
persisting stress responses.
In addition to stress associated with death and killing, all individuals must manage the stresses of the 
operational environment. 4 At the simplest level, living 
in austere conditions with exposure to the elements 
and diminished access to regular physical comforts is 
575
 Combat and Operational Stress 
Figure 37-1. The combat and operational stress continuum model with its four color-coded stress zones. 
PTSD: posttraumatic stress disorder
Reproduced from: Nash WP. US Marine Corps and Navy combat and operational stress continuum model: a tool for leaders. In: Ritchie EC, ed. Combat and Operational Behavioral Health. Fort Detrick, MD: Borden Institute; 2011: Figure 7-1.
an operational stress. Cold, heat, dirt, noise, and unpleasant smells all take a cumulative toll on forward 
personnel. Separation from family or other primary 
social supports can present significant stress, as can 
living in a confined environment with fellow soldiers 
for a prolonged period of time. Combat operations 
typically occur around the clock, with significant risk 
of fatigue as an additional stress. Table 37-1 summarizes common combat and operational stresses the 
MMO should consider.
RESILIENCY AND CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS AND UNITS
“Some of the most potent factors which contribute to high morale in military groups are confidence in their own 
ability, faith and trust in their leaders and a sureness of purpose.”
—Captain Francis Braceland, 19465 
Prevention is the best medicine. Commanders 
of military units are charged with developing and 
training combat-ready units. The unit MMO plays a 
key role in fostering an environment that promotes a 
unit’s ability to withstand stress. Resilience represents 
a state in which members of a unit are able to tolerate 
significant stress and react constructively to diminish 
that stress. By understanding factors in individuals 
and units that promote resilience, the MMO can be a 
vital advisor to unit leadership.
Individual Resilience and Vulnerability
Every individual brings strengths and vulnerabilities into military service. Resilient individuals possess 
a stable sense of self. From a military perspective, this 
is an individual who has a clear sense of identity as a 
soldier, sailor, airman, or marine and whose experiences in the military reinforce that identity. Resilient 
individuals also show use of adaptive coping mechanisms such as recognizing areas of control, positive 
cognitive appraisal, and engaging social support. 6 Past 
exposure to trauma has a variable impact on individual 
resilience. There is significant evidence to support that 
risk of psychological injury is related to the burden of 
childhood trauma. 7 Individuals with significant homefront stress demonstrate worse overall psychological 
health. 8 Members of elite combat units typically show 
greater resilience, and this is believed to be a combination of selection factors for membership and ongoing 
high-intensity training to promote resilience.
Unit Resilience and Vulnerability
Group dynamics can both promote and detract from 
individual resilience. The most consistently cited protec576
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
TABLE 37-1
EXAMPLES OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESSORS 
PHYSICAL STRESSORS 
MENTAL STRESSORS
Environmental 
Cognitive
• 
Heat, cold, wetness, dust, vibration, noise, blast 
• 
Information (sensory overload or deprivation)
• 
Noxious odors (fumes, poisons, chemicals) 
• Ambiguity, uncertainty, unpredictability
• 
Directed-energy weapons/devices 
• 
Time pressure or waiting
• 
Ionizing radiation 
• 
Difficult decisions (rules of engagement) 
• 
Infectious agents 
• 
Organizational dynamics and changes
• 
Physical work 
• 
Hard choices versus no choice
• 
Poor visibility (bright lights, darkness, haze) 
• 
Recognition of impaired functioning
• 
Difficult or arduous terrain 
• 
Working beyond skill level
• 
High altitude 
• 
Previous failures
 
 
Physiological 
Emotional
• 
Sleep deprivation 
• 
Being new in unit, isolated, lonely
• 
Dehydration 
• 
Fear and anxiety-producing threats
• 
Malnutrition 
 
(of death, injury, failure, or loss) 
• 
Poor hygiene 
• 
Grief-producing losses (bereavement)
• 
Muscular and aerobic fatigue 
• 
Resentment, anger, and rage-producing frustration and guilt
• 
Overuse or underuse of muscles 
• 
Inactivity producing boredom
• 
Impaired immune system 
• 
Conflicting/divided motives and loyalties
• 
Illness or injury 
• 
Spiritual confrontation or temptation
• 
Sexual frustration 
 
causing loss of faith
• 
Substance use (smoking, caffeine, alcohol) 
• 
Interpersonal conflict (unit, buddy) 
• 
Obesity 
• 
Home-front worries, homesickness
• 
Poor physical condition 
• 
Loss of privacy 
 
 
• 
Victimization/harassment
 
 
• 
Exposure to combat/dead bodies
 
 
• 
Having to kill
Adapted from: US Department of the Army. Combat and Operational Stress Control. Washington, DC; DA; 2006. Field Manual 4-02. 51.
tive factor against psychological injury in combat is 
unit cohesion. 9 Key elements of cohesion are a sense of 
attachment to members in the unit and viewing other 
members as a source of emotional support. Conversely, 
units with significant internal distrust or a perceived 
disregard for individual welfare are less resilient and may 
put their members at risk under stress. Leadership is another key element of unit resilience. Units gain resilience 
when leaders communicate a clear sense of mission and 
recognize the contribution of all members of the unit. 10 
REACTIONS TO COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS
Prolonged or extreme stress can leave units or individuals with significant impairment. Such emotional 
reactions or behaviors are referred to as combat and 
operational stress reactions or injuries. These reactions 
tend to fall into distinct categories, and more than one 
type of reaction may occur within any individual or 
in reaction to particular stressors. Patterns of combat 
and operational stress reaction include acute stress 
reactions, operational fatigue, traumatic grief, and 
moral injury. 4 
Acute stress reactions represent a maladaptive psychological and physiologic reaction to an extreme 
stress. This is typically a single severe traumatic event, 
but acute stress reactions can also occur after a series 
of severe traumas. Emotional manifestations of acute 
stress reactions include restlessness, panic, irritability, 
rage, and sometimes numbing. Cognitive responses 
include confusion, memory problems, and traumatic 
amnesia. Physical complaints can include fatigue, loss 
of bowel and bladder control, insomnia, palpitations, 
and shortness of breath. Dissociation, in which an individual becomes detached from their surroundings 
or experiences amnesia, represents a severe form of 
acute stress reaction. Acute stress reaction should not 
be confused with posttraumatic stress disorder. Even 
though many symptoms are shared, an acute stress 
reaction is a time-limited response to psychological 
trauma.
577
 Combat and Operational Stress 
Operational fatigue occurs in the presence of less intense but prolonged stresses. Throughout history this 
condition has received names such as “soldier’s heart” 
and “old sergeant’s syndrome.” Such reactions are 
characterized by a persistent and constant anxiety or 
depressed state. Affected individuals may experience 
irritability or depressed mood, persistent anxiety or 
restlessness, changes in appetite or energy, insomnia, 
concentration difficulties, muscular tension, or tremor.
Traumatic grief is a disruption in the normal grieving process brought on by sudden or traumatic loss. 
Normal grieving is the healthy process by which individuals allow themselves to experience emotional reactions associated with loss and engage in the cognitive 
process of adapting to a world without the deceased 
individual. Losses experienced in combat, by their 
abrupt and violent nature, tend to promote traumatic 
grief reactions. Significant complications of traumatic 
grief involve distorted beliefs about the causes and 
implications of the death. An affected member may 
present with problems with excessive guilt and sense 
of responsibility over the death. Conversely, an individual may externalize their guilt through acting out 
or undermining leaders.
Moral injury refers to psychological reactions stemming from real or perceived transgressions of moral 
codes by self or others and betrayals of trust. 11 Modern 
warfare increasingly puts individuals in ambiguous 
circumstances where the distinction between hostile 
combatant and innocent civilian is blurry. A wellintended soldier may fire on a presumed insurgent 
only to discover that he has killed a noncombatant. In 
the same vein, individuals may engage in intentional 
acts while in the heat of battle that later produce intense 
feelings of shame or anger. As a result, individuals 
can respond with symptoms of intense anger, revenge 
fantasies or acts, intense feelings of shame and guilt, 
and self-destructive or avoidant behaviors.
PRINCIPLES OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS ASSESSMENT
Assessment of combat stress control casualties is a 
core competency of the MMO. The tasks of assessment 
involve gathering relevant history, inquiring about 
individual and unit factors promoting or detracting 
from individual resiliency, screening, establishing 
appropriate differential diagnosis, and communicating disposition. The simplified goal of a combat and 
operational stress control assessment is to identify 
where the individual is along the stress response continuum. Exhibit 37-1 summarizes important elements 
of a combat stress control evaluation. 
Relevant history entails focus on the presenting 
symptoms and circumstances. By constructing a narrative of the events, thoughts, and feelings immediately 
preceding presentation, the MMO gains valuable insight into the nature of the problem. For instance, an 
individual presenting with 24 hours of restlessness, irritability, insomnia, and intrusive images of a firefight 
immediately following the event suggests a combat 
stress reaction or acute stress injury. An individual 
presenting with 6 weeks of insomnia and irritability 
in the context of concerns that his wife is having an 
affair back home suggests an adjustment disorder. In 
both individuals it is essential to identify the number 
and significance of potentially traumatic exposures in 
the current deployment to promptly identify risk for 
acute stress injuries.
In assessing individual and unit resilience, it is 
important to identify and assign weight to each factor 
contributing to or detracting from resilience. Does the 
soldier identify a sense of purpose or meaning to their 
current job? Does the identity of their unit or military 
occupational specialty reconcile with their sense of 
who they are? Do they view their leaders as effective 
and having the best interest of unit members in mind? 
Once the breadth of resiliency factors are considered 
and weighed against each other, a clearer picture of 
an individual’s prognosis emerges. Members with 
significant questions about the usefulness of their job, 
uncertainty in their ability to effectively complete it, 
disconnection from peers, or a distrust of leadership 
they view as inept are less likely to be resilient and 
therefore at higher risk for persisting combat stress 
reactions. Further, they are less likely to respond favorably to typical combat stress control interventions 
and may require significantly more intervention to 
restore capability.
Differential diagnosis should first exclude the 
presence of mental or medical illness. A major 
depressive disorder should not be confused with 
a combat fatigue reaction, and the principle of 
expectancy, or prompt recovery and return to 
duty, would not be appropriate. Intoxication or 
withdrawal from substances is another important 
consideration. Although access to alcohol and other 
substances of abuse is greatly restricted in the combat environment, they are not impossible to obtain. 
The evaluator also needs to consider exposure to 
environmental toxins or side effects of medications. 
An important example of this is development of 
anxiety symptoms following prophylaxis with 
mefloquine for malaria. If combat stress reaction 
is present, the provider should characterize the 
type of the reaction. Significant distress or impair578
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
EXHIBIT 37-1
ELEMENTS OF COMBAT STRESS CONTROL EVALUATION
History
• Circumstances of presentation
• Current symptoms and impairment
• Trauma exposure
Resilience factors
• Individual: sense of self, purpose, home-front concerns
• Unit: cohesion, leadership, communication
• Environmental factors
Screening 
• Psychiatric illness
• Medical conditions
• Medication and supplements
Mental status examination
Safety assessment
ment in response to home-front stressors typically 
represents adjustment disorder, but in more severe 
or prolonged cases, such distress may represent a 
depressive or anxiety disorder. 
The principles of combat and operational stress 
control were first developed by the British and French 
forces during World War I. These principles were 
characterized as “PIES”: proximity, immediacy, expectancy, and simplicity. 12 While these principles were 
more recently modified into a new acronym, “BICEPS” 
(brevity, immediacy, contact/centrality, expectancy, 
proximity, simplicity), the basic forward psychiatry 
principles initially established during World War I continue to serve as the cornerstone to modern deployed 
mental health care. 10
The concept of brevity in forward psychiatry treatment is that the care provided for the treatment of 
a combat operational stress reaction should be time 
limited. In US military doctrine there is some variance as to the time limit, but all guidelines state that if 
symptoms do not improve within 72 to 96 hours, then 
the service member should be evacuated to a higher 
level of care. Immediacy refers to psychiatric casualties 
being treated as soon as possible. Embedded military 
mental health providers are available throughout the 
operating theater to ensure readily accessible care. 
The principle of contact involves keeping the service 
member connected to his or her unit. A key aspect to 
this step is the importance of ensuring that the service 
member continues to feel an important part of the unit 
and a vital contributor to the unit’s mission success. 
Expectancy refers to facilitating the service member’s 
expectation of returning to duty. In essence, the MMO 
must make clear early that the treatment goal is for the 
service member to return to duty in the combat role. 
Once service members assume the identity of “injured” 
or “patient,” they make a cognitive shift in role and 
expected outcome. It is therefore important to address 
service members by their military title and refrain from 
using the term “casualty” or “patient.” Prior reports 
have noted that in past operations failure to pay close 
attention to labeling and to set expectations resulted in 
a contagion effect and an increased number of soldiers 
evacuated from the battlefield. 13 
Proximity refers to psychiatric casualties being 
treated geographically close to operating units in order 
to reinforce attachment to their unit. Since World War 
I, US military forces have pushed medical and mental 
health resources toward the front lines to facilitate this 
principle. Since the early 2000s, the Army and Marine 
Corps have embedded psychiatrists, social workers, 
nurse practitioners, and psychologists at the brigade 
and regimental levels both in combat and during 
peacetime. This has not only facilitated adherence to 
the principle of proximity, but has also increased the 
chance that service members are treated by providers 
assigned to their unit, thus providing consistency and 
greater availability of provider staff. 
Simplicity refers to using brief and straightforward 
treatment focused on the basics to emphasize the norPRINCIPLES OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS CONTROL
579
 Combat and Operational Stress 
mality of the service member’s experience rather than 
implying some significant level of mental illness. 14 The 
concept of simplicity in treatment is best exemplified 
by the “five R’s”: (1) rest, (2) rehydration and replenishment of nutrients, (3) restoration of confidence through 
meaningful work, (4) reassurance that recovery is 
likely, and (5) return to duty. 10 
The effectiveness of forward psychiatry principles 
remains controversial, primarily associated with the 
desired effect of the treatment. Since World War II, 
return to duty rates have been cited at levels greater 
than 70% to 80%. 15 However, critics note that studies 
find varying rates of combat stress relapse associated with forward psychiatry, and that some symptomatic service members are eventually evacuated 
from the combat theater despite forward psychiatric 
treatment. 13 Another key question concerns the 
long-term psychological benefit from forward 
psychiatry treatment. Israeli researchers noted that 
evacuation of individuals with mild combat operational stress injuries worsened their prognosis and 
further complicated their recovery. 16 However, a 
recent RAND report15 noted that service members 
who had a combat operational stress reaction were 
more likely to later develop posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Thus, despite the widespread acceptance 
of forward psychiatry principles, the effectiveness 
of this treatment to both return service members to 
duty and to prevent long-term psychological health 
outcomes remains inconclusive. 13 Further studies are 
needed to determine the overall short- and long-term 
effectiveness of forward psychiatry.
MANAGEMENT OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS REACTIONS IN INDIVIDUALS
While forward psychiatry principles represent the 
base of combat operational stress treatment and may 
be the only level of care available during high-intensity 
combat, the recent wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have 
shown that higher levels of care can be delivered in a 
mature theater. 
Psychotherapy in Theater
The most common reasons service members seek 
mental healthcare during a deployment are family 
stressors, combat exposure, and difficulties with the 
unit leadership. 17 Common focus areas of treatment 
include relationship stress, grief and loss, anger and 
aggression, depression, anxiety and panic symptoms, 
and managing traumatic events. Psychotherapeutic 
interventions can be very effective for these complaints. 
Providing effective psychotherapy during a deployment can be challenging. Service members’ time and 
availability may be limited, and there is a consistent 
expectation that they remain combat effective during 
treatment. Service members seeking mental health 
intervention typically present for only one visit while 
deployed. 18 Therefore, treatment approaches used in 
garrison may need to be adjusted. In order to be effective, interventions must be focused and brief.
Given the large overlap of physiological and psychological symptoms experienced in response to deployment 
stress, targeting physical symptoms of stress can be highly 
effective. Relaxation training, incorporating abdominal 
breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, guided imagery, and self-hypnosis are skills that an MMO can teach 
quickly and that can provide significant benefit in an 
environment likely to remain continuously stressful. 19 
Abdominal breathing promotes slow and deep breathing by encouraging expansion of the abdomen rather 
than the chest. This is easily taught by having the 
individual place a hand on their chest and abdomen 
while breathing in slowly. The provider encourages 
the individual to move the abdominal hand and slow 
breathing through counting. 
Progressive muscle relaxation involves intermittently flexing or engaging tension in specific muscle 
groups for 7 to 10 seconds, followed by relaxation. 
The provider guides the individual through this pattern of tension and relaxation, starting with the most 
peripheral muscles and ending with core muscles. 
In guided imagery, the provider talks the individual 
through a mutually agreed-on peaceful scene with a 
combination of verbal prompts and periods of silence. 
The individual keeps their eyes closed throughout the 
process and visualizes the scene described. 
Self-hypnosis requires the individual to focus intensely on an internal stimulus such as breath counting 
or a neutral word or phrase. This intense focus induces 
a relaxation response.
Brief cognitive interventions are also available to 
the MMO and can help distressed service members 
cope and adapt to overwhelming stress. Cognitive 
interventions target distorted thoughts common in 
distressed individuals (eg, “It’s all my fault, I always 
mess up,” or “I know he/she is leaving me”). Simple 
intervention involves helping the individual identify 
their distorted thoughts and consider possible alternatives that are less distressing.
Mental health providers need to keep in mind that 
they must be available at all hours of the day to respond 
to an emergent situation or traumatic event, and these 
580
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
events, along with enemy engagements, can result in 
both the provider and the service member being unable to meet as scheduled. Thus, trying to schedule 
treatment times with military personnel is difficult, 
making the ability to capitalize on brief treatment 
modalities key. Providers should adapt their treatment 
to single-session models because they may not have 
another opportunity for intervention. If the provider 
determines that long-term, in-depth psychotherapy 
is required, a risk assessment should be conducted 
and consideration for transfer to a higher level of care 
considered. 
Medication Management in Theater
Prior to the operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
mental health treatment focused on triage and nonpharmacological interventions aimed at normalizing 
and minimizing combat stress. Medications were generally used only in emergency situations to treat acute 
psychosis or agitation, typically as chemical restraint 
while awaiting evacuation. With the development of 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in the 
1990s, providers gained the ability to prescribe medications without requirements for laboratory monitoring, 
concern for significant side effects, or risk of overdose. 
This led to more common medication use in theater, 
either because service members deployed already taking psychotropic medications, or they were prescribed 
in theater. 
For service members with previously identified 
mental health conditions, the US Department of Defense specifies minimum mental health requirements 
for deployment. Specific conditions such as bipolar 
and psychotic disorder and classes of medications such 
as lithium or anticonvulsants can disqualify service 
members from deployment, while some may require 
a waiver. 20 Factors to consider for deploying service 
members with mental health conditions include the 
ongoing ability to access care, the risk of worsening 
symptoms, and continuity of care. A recent study 
showed that when a continuity of care plan is put 
in place prior to deployment, the risk of worsening 
symptoms, mental health evacuation, and serious 
events are decreased. 21
Generally, combat and operational stress reactions 
do not require treatment with medications other than 
possibly short-term use of sleep aids. Those service 
members who develop significant mood, anxiety, or 
trauma- and stress-related disorders while deployed 
may benefit from medication. Factors affecting the 
decision to prescribe medications in the deployed environment include availability of medication, access to 
follow-up, and potential side effects. The MMO must 
balance these factors against an individual’s operational assignment, tempo of operations, and location. 
There is no standardized mechanism for medication management in theater. The proximity of mental 
health provider and pharmacy resources, as well as the 
comfort level of the primary care provider in managing 
psychotropic medications, will significantly impact the 
process. Common patterns of care are either evaluation 
and follow-up with a psychiatrist, or initial prescribing by a psychiatrist with follow-up by a primary care 
provider (with or without telephonic consultation with 
a psychiatrist). Despite these variables, certain factors 
remain constant. Providers should generally prescribe 
medication infrequently, ensure a reliable follow-up 
mechanism, and evacuate service members with 
prolonged or more than moderate-level symptoms. 
The most common medications prescribed by theater 
mental health providers during the Operation Iraqi 
Freedom were SSRIs (40% of patients seen) and sleep 
aids (38% of patients seen). 18
The decision whether or not to prescribe psychotropic medications will be driven by the ability of the 
provider to safely and effectively care for their units. 
Providers must recognize the limitations of their 
resources, capabilities, and situation, and make the 
decision to treat in theater, return service members to 
their home station, or delay treatment until the service 
member returns home as scheduled. The key factors 
that impact this decision include symptom severity, 
current level of occupational dysfunction, response 
to treatment, duty limitations due to the medications, 
and the responsibilities the service member is expected 
to perform. 
Restoration Centers
Treatment of a service member with a combat and 
operational stress reaction is meant to be short in duration and should be carried out in close proximity to 
the unit. The majority of combat and operational stress 
reactions should be treated locally, with a maximum 
of 1 to 2 nights away from their unit, typically at the 
aid station or headquarters. However, if symptoms 
are severe or persist beyond 72 to 96 hours, the MMO 
should consider evacuation of the individual to a 
higher level of care. In recent conflicts, theater commanders have established specialized restoration 
centers to meet this need.
Restoration centers are located in the theater of 
operations but generally not close in proximity to 
the unit or the front lines. These centers are staffed 
by specialized mental health personnel and provide 
service members with intensive outpatient treatment for up to a week. Typical interventions include 
581
 Combat and Operational Stress 
cognitive and occupational therapy, with a focus on 
expectancy and return to duty. All interventions occur within a highly structured military environment 
to reinforce the concepts of contact and expectancy. 10 
Service members whose symptoms do not improve 
within 1 week are normally evacuated from theater 
and returned to their home station for more intensive 
psychiatric care. It is important to note that restoration 
centers are not inpatient facilities; they do not have the 
capacity to manage severely behaviorally disturbed or 
dangerous patients other than for acute stabilization 
and transport. In general, inpatient capabilities are 
very limited in a deployed environment. 
Management and Disposition of Severe Reactions 
and Psychiatric Illness
Regardless of prevention and resiliency efforts, 
there will be a small percentage of patients with severe 
and dangerous reactions and persisting psychiatric 
illness. Acute psychosis and mania can render individuals dangerous due to unpredictable behavior 
and ready access to weapons and live ammunition. 
Individuals with suicidal ideation, whether in the 
context of acute stressors or psychiatric illness, should 
be similarly managed with extreme caution. Those 
suffering severe symptoms placing them at risk for 
suicide or unpredictable behavior require evacuation 
from theater. MMOs must ensure continuous positive 
control of such patients. 
Once a service member with acute suicide risk 
or unpredictable behavior is identified, the MMO 
must ensure that the individual stays under direct 
observation in a safe environment at all times until safely evacuated. This may involve holding the 
person in the aid station with or without the use of 
sedative medications or physical restraints. Releasing the individual to a “unit watch” should only be 
considered when there is a reliable command representative educated on the individual’s condition, and 
never as an alternative to evacuation. The unit must 
designate a specific individual to take responsibility 
for the soldier and understand the specific risks their 
condition presents. Finally, the unit must ensure the 
at-risk individual is not allowed access to weapons 
while awaiting evacuation. 22
MANAGEMENT OF COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL STRESS REACTIONS IN UNITS— 
TRAUMATIC EVENT MANAGEMENT
Exposure to combat-related potentially traumatic 
events in which service members experience intense 
feelings of terror, horror, helplessness, or hopelessness is one of the principal risk factors for behavioral 
health problems in a combat setting. 23 Examples of 
combat-related potentially traumatic events include 
being ambushed by the enemy, being in close proximity to an improvised explosive device or booby trap 
attack, or having a unit member seriously injured or 
killed. Traumatic event management (TEM) describes 
a process of intervention after a potentially traumatic 
event to prevent, identify, and manage combat operational stress reactions in individuals and units as 
early as possible. 
 It is important to recognize that TEM is a continuous process and not an acute intervention. Prior to a 
potentially traumatic event, leaders should be trained to 
understand what events are potentially traumatic, how 
to activate a TEM response, and what TEM services are 
available. Following a potentially traumatic event, leaders 
must ensure their service members are safe and in a secure location, that the basic needs of the service members 
are met, and that a TEM response team is notified. Unit 
MMOs and ministry personnel are a key link in identifying units at risk and experiencing signs of psychological 
distress, as well as initiating the chain of response.
A TEM team comprised of embedded mental 
health providers and unit ministry personnel works 
in conjunction with the unit leadership to proactively 
manage the psychological effects of the traumatic experience. The TEM response begins with a general needs 
assessment to determine the overall health of the unit 
and whether service members need immediate mental 
health care for combat operational stress reactions. 
Mental health personnel also provide consultation and 
education to unit leaders and service members regarding available services and how to access mental health 
care. It is important throughout this process that the 
TEM response team work in close cooperation with the 
unit leadership to reinforce the perception that leaders 
are requesting intervention on behalf of the unit. 
A key event during the initial response phase is 
the leader-led after action review. This review is not a 
psychological debriefing but rather a military process 
that assists in encouraging service members to talk 
about the event. In healthy units this review is part of 
the innate battle rhythm and not a special event when 
a potentially traumatic event occurs.
Historically, the military mental health provider in 
conjunction with the unit leader determined if a group 
psychological debriefing should be conducted. There 
are numerous psychological debriefing models; however, each model focuses on recognizing the trauma 
and processing reactions to it. These debriefings differ 
582
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
from military after action reviews in that the focus is on 
individual’s psychological reactions and is conducted 
by a trained counselor. Most debriefing models derive 
from the work of Marshall during World War II. 24 Of 
note, Marshall’s sessions were not intended to provide 
psychological benefits but rather to gather historical 
data for military record keeping; however, he noted 
that the process provided clarity of events and support 
for the participants. He surmised that these debriefings 
helped to decrease the development of combat stress 
reactions. 24
The effectiveness of psychological debriefings 
continues to be debated by both military and civilian 
mental health providers. Few research studies have 
focused specifically on the effectiveness or risk/benefit 
of psychological debriefings in military populations. 
In contrast, civilian studies of victims are mixed with 
some demonstrating benefits as well as negative outcomes. 25–29 A recent Cochrane analysis recommended 
against using psychological debriefings citing that the 
risks outweighed the benefits based on the civilian 
literature. 29 A key limitation to both the civilian data 
and the Cochrane review is the lack of a standardized 
TEM debriefing process. There are multiple models 
practiced commonly in TEM debriefings including 
critical event debriefing (CED), critical incident stress 
debriefing (CISD), psychiatric debriefing, historical 
debriefing, and intelligence debriefing. A lack of consistent standardized protocols for TEM debriefing group 
formation and execution limits the ability to assess its 
effectiveness and the conclusions that can be drawn 
from such studies. 
In spite of all of the concern about potential risk 
and lack of effectiveness, psychological debriefings remain a tool frequently employed by military 
mental health providers as military leaders are attuned to the long-term risks of exposure to potentially traumatic events. As such, MMOs and mental 
health providers should pursue the most up-to-date 
evidence on TEM. The current US Army Combat 
Operational Stress Control field manual provides a 
guideline for TEM operations but leaves the decision to conduct a psychological debriefing and the 
method of debriefing open to the mental health 
provider. 10 A recent review of practices used among 
NATO forces in Afghanistan indicated that some 
sort of group intervention remains the norm, but 
that the term “debriefing” is generally avoided. 30
SUMMARY
Combat and operational stress control is a collective 
effort of individuals, unit leaders, medical, ministry, 
and mental health personnel. It requires understanding of the fundamentals of human stress response, and 
knowledge of the predictable patterns of stress injury. 
The MMO has an obligation to promote psychological resilience within their unit and is a key source of 
surveillance and recommendations for unit leaders. 
When properly managed, the majority of individuals suffering even the most severe acute stress injuries will likely recover with simple PIES/BICEPS 
interventions and return to duty. The MMO can 
initiate many of these interventions with or without 
the assistance of mental health personnel. Finally, 
when potentially traumatic events occur, the MMO 
should understand the principles of traumatic event 
management and be prepared to request mental 
health assistance.
 
1. Mora F, Segovia G, Del Arco A, de Blas M, Garrido P. Stress, neurotransmitters, corticosterone and body-brain integration. Brain Res. 201;1476:71–85. doi: 10. 1016/j.brainres. 2011. 12. 049.
 
2. Nash WP. US Marine Corps and Navy combat and operational stress continuum model: a tool for leaders. In: Ritchie 
EC, ed. Combat and Operational Behavioral Health. Fort Detrick, MD: Borden Institute; 2011: Chap 7.
 
3. Grossman DA. On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society. New York, NY: Back Bay Books/
Little Brown and Company; 2009.
 
4. Nash WP. Combat/operational stress adaptations and injuries. In Figley CR, Nash WP, eds. Combat Stress Injury: Theory, 
Research, and Management. New York, NY: Routledge; 2007: Chap 3.
 
5. Braceland F. Psychiatric lessons learned from World War II. Am J Psychiatry. 1947;103(5):587–593.
 
6. Gibbons SW, Shafer M, Aramanda L, Hickling EJ, Benedek DM. Combat health care providers and resiliency: adaptive 
coping mechanisms during and after deployment. Psychol Serv. 2014;11(2):192–199. doi: 10. 1037/a0033165.
REFERENCES
583
 Combat and Operational Stress 
 
7. Agorastos A, Pittman JO, Angkaw AC, et al. The cumulative effect of different childhood trauma types on self-reported 
symptoms of adult male depression and PTSD, substance abuse and health-related quality of life in a large active-duty 
military cohort. J Psychiatr Res. 2014;58:46–54. doi: 10. 1016/j.jpsychires. 2014. 07. 014.
 
8. Mulligan K, Jones N, Davies M, et al. Effects of home on the mental health of British forces serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. Br J Psychiatry. 2012;201(3):193–198. doi: 10. 1192/bjp.bp. 111. 097527.
 
9. Sundin J, Jones N, Greenberg N, et al. Mental health among commando, airborne and other UK infantry personnel. 
Occup Med (Lond). 2010;60(7):552–559. doi: 10. 1093/occmed/kqq129.
 10. US Department of the Army. Combat and Operational Stress Control. Washington, DC; DA; 2006. Field Manual 4-02. 51.
 11. Litz BT, Stein N, Delaney E, et al. Moral injury and moral repair in war veterans: a preliminary model and intervention 
strategy. Clin Psychol Rev. 2009;29(8):695–706. doi: 10. 1016/j.cpr. 2009. 07. 003.
 12. Rock NL, Stokes JW, Koshes RJ, Fagan J, Cline WR, Jones, FD. US Army combat psychiatry. In: Jones FD, Sparacino 
LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes JW, eds. War Psychiatry. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General of the 
Army, Borden Institute; 1995: Chap 7. 
 13. Jones E, Wessely S. “Forward psychiatry” in the military: its origins and effectiveness. J Trauma Stress. 2003;16(4):411–419. 
doi: 10. 1023/a:1024426321072.
 14. Jones DR. US Air Force combat psychiatry. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, Stokes JW, eds. War 
Psychiatry. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General of the Army, Borden Institute; 1995: Chap 8.
 15. Helmus, TC, Glenn RW. Steeling the Mind: Combat Stress Reactions and Their Implications for Urban Warfare. Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND Corporation; 2005.
 16. Belenky GL, Tyner CF, Sodetz FJ. Israeli Battle Shock Casualties: 1973 and 1982. Washington, DC: Walter Reed Army 
Institute of Research; 1983. 
 17. Warner CH, Breitbach JE, Appenzeller GN, Yates V, Grieger T, Webster WG. Division mental health in the new brigade 
combat team structure: part I. Predeployment and deployment. Mil Med. 2007;172(9):907–911. 
 18. Schmitz KJ, Schmied EA, Webb-Murphy JA, et al. Psychiatric diagnoses and treatment of U.S. military personnel while 
deployed to Iraq. Mil Med. 2012;177(4):380–389. 
 19. Bourne EJ. The Anxiety and Phobia Workbook. 5th ed. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications Inc; 2010.
 20. US Department of Defense. Deployment-Limiting Medical Conditions for Service Members and DoD Civilian Employees. 
Washington DC: DoD; 2010. DoD Instruction 6490. 07.
 21. Warner CH, Appenzeller GN, Parker JR, Warner CM, Hoge CW. Effectiveness of mental health screening and coordination of in-theater care prior to deployment to Iraq: a cohort study. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168(4):378–385. doi: 10. 1176/
appi.ajp. 2010. 10091303.
 22. Payne SE, Hill JV, Johnson DE. The use of unit watch or command interest profile in the management of suicide and 
homicide risk: rationale and guidelines for the military mental health professional. Mil Med. 2008;173(1):25–35. 
 23. Fontana A, Rosenheck R. Psychological benefits and liabilities of traumatic exposure in the war zone. J Trauma Stress. 
1998;11(3):485–503. doi: 10. 1023/a:1024452612412.
 24. Koshes RJ, Young SA, Stokes JW. Debriefing following combat. In: Jones FD, Sparacino LR, Wilcox VL, Rothberg JM, 
Stokes JW, eds. War Psychiatry. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General of the Army, Borden Institute; 1995: 
Chap 11.
 25. Adler AB, Castro CA, McGurk D. Time-driven battlemind psychological debriefing: a group-level early intervention 
in combat. Mil Med. 2009;174(1):21–28. 
584
Fundamentals of Military Medicine 
 26. Jacobs J, Horne-Moyer HL, Jones R. The effectiveness of critical incident stress debriefing with primary and secondary 
trauma victims. Int J Emerg Ment Health. 2004;6(1):5–14. 
 27. MacDonald CM. Evaluation of stress debriefing interventions with military populations. Mil Med. 2003;168(12):961–968. 
 28. Mitchell SG, Mitchell JT. Caplan, community, and critical incident stress management. Int J Emerg Ment Health. 
2006;8(1):5–14. 
 29. Rose S, Bisson J, Churchill R, Wessely S. Psychological debriefing for preventing post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002(2):Cd000560. doi: 10. 1002/14651858.cd000560.
 30. Vermetten E, Greenberg N, Boeschoten MA, et al. Deployment-related mental health support: comparative analysis 
comparative analysis of NATO and allied ISAF partners. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2014;5. doi: 10. 3402/ejpt.
v5. 23732. 
