603
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
Chapter 39
CASUALTY TRANSPORT AND 
EVACUATION
CHETAN U. KHAROD, MD, MPH*; BRENNA M. SHACKELFORD, MD†; and ROBERT L. MABRY, MD‡
INTRODUCTION
MILITARY CASUALTY EVACUATION TERMINOLOGY
EVOLUTION OF MILITARY CASUALTY EVACUATION DOCTRINE
Larrey and Letterman
Total War
World War II
EVOLUTION OF AEROMEDICAL EVACUATION
Korea
Vietnam
Late 20th Century
Evacuation Lessons From Iraq and Afghanistan
EVACUATION IN FUTURE CONFLICTS
The Operational Environment
Principles of Evacuation for Future Conflicts
MODEL FOR CASUALTY CARE CONTINUUM SUCCESS
SUMMARY
*Colonel (Retired), US Air Force, Medical Corps, Senior Flight Surgeon; Program Director, Military EMS & Disaster Medicine Fellowship, San Antonio 
Military Medical Center, JBSA, Fort Sam Houston, Texas
†Consultant Emergency Physician, New Zealand
‡Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army; Command Surgeon, Joint Special Operations Command, Fort Bragg, North Carolina
604
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Casualty evacuation, a key phase of combat casualty care, has evolved along three intersecting vectors 
of technology: (1) military weapons and tactics, (2) 
medical care, and (3) transportation. This chapter 
discusses the historical evolution of casualty evacuation, including lessons most recently learned in Iraq 
and Afghanistan. This historical perspective is critical 
to understanding how current US systems developed 
and provides insight into how casualty care during 
evacuation can be improved. It discusses the potential 
challenges future conflicts may bring and provides a 
set of principles that can be used by military physicians 
on future battlefields. This is not an in-depth technical manual discussing the nuances of each individual 
evacuation platform that can be found on the modern 
battlefield, nor does it substitute for current medical 
evacuation field and technical manuals. Rather, the 
chapter’s goal is to provide a conceptual understanding and a set of principles that will enable military 
medical providers to deliver the best possible care to 
their patients during evacuation, from point of injury 
(POI) to definitive care.
MILITARY CASUALTY EVACUATION TERMINOLOGY
To understand the history, evolution, and current 
state of the science of casualty evacuation and en route 
care, it is essential to understand the language of this 
key domain of battlefield medicine. 
Casualty evacuation (CASEVAC), in a traditional 
sense, is rapid, unregulated movement of any casualty 
at any point along the continuum of casualty care 
from the POI onward. CASEVAC can take place via 
personnel carries, vehicles, or aircraft available for 
transport. Regulated movement of these casualties, 
with the addition of medical personnel on a medically 
equipped platform, from both POI to dedicated medical care or a medical treatment facility (MTF), or from 
one MTF to another, is termed medical evacuation 
(MEDEVAC). Tactical evacuation (TACEVAC) is the 
overarching term for both CASEVAC and MEDEVAC, 
and encompasses the full spectrum of transport from 
a hostile or austere POI to advanced medical care in a 
secure environment. 
The term en route care is defined by the twin 
goals of providing medical treatment and sustaining or 
improving the patient’s medical condition during the 
evacuation process. It is not based on the movement 
platform itself. En route care is a dynamic process 
with the goal of providing the best care possible for 
patients, by adjusting for patient condition, threat, 
and mission constraints by selection of appropriate 
platforms and personnel to accomplish the medical 
evacuation mission.
Much like modern medicine, these terms are continually evolving, now referring more simply to the 
platform and regulatory status in which a casualty is 
moved and less to the nature of personnel on board. 
A variety of patient movement platforms are utilized 
for evacuation and en route care. Ground transport 
can be by standard ambulance, tactical vehicle, bus, 
or any other available medium. Air assets consist of 
both rotary and fixed-wing aircraft, including assets 
of the US Army, Air Force, Navy, and more recently, 
the Marine Corps. 
Unregulated patients are the injured, typically 
located at or close to the POI, before they have been 
assigned a patient movement request (PMR). Regardless of platform, the unregulated status of these 
patients defines their transport as CASEVAC, and their 
movement is influenced by tactical factors and by triage status. These patients may or may not receive en 
route care; if they do, it can vary greatly, from flight 
medics placing a tourniquet and performing needle 
decompression to critical care teams performing damage control resuscitation en route. An example of an 
unregulated patient is a casualty thrown from a vehicle 
in an improvised explosive device blast, dragged to 
a casualty collection point, and subsequently transported via another military vehicle immediately to the 
nearest forward medical care. 
Once patients receive a PMR, they are termed regulated. PMRs are created by the attending physician 
at the patient’s location in conjunction with an Air 
Force aeromedical evacuation liaison team. The PMR 
is further evaluated and subsequently validated by 
an aeromedical evacuation control center flight nurse 
and flight surgeon team, with subsequent preparation 
for the patient’s airlift and movement requirements. 
This process requires both time and personnel, which 
typically means the patient has been stabilized at an 
MTF prior to movement. Regulated medical evacuation takes into account the availability of air assets, 
the patient’s clinical status, the nature of the en route 
care expertise available, and the accepting facility’s 
space and specific medical capability for the casualty. 
A casualty with a traumatic amputation of the leg, 
who has had damage control surgery at a Role 2 MTF 
and is being transported by Air Force aeromedical 
evacuation, is an example of a regulated patient. Army 
MEDEVAC often transports patients in both categories, 
605
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
carrying patients from POI as well as between MTFs 
when intra-theater transport is necessary. 
Dynamic en route care capability is now being positioned on what were traditionally considered CASEVAC air platforms. These medical teams are comprised 
of highly trained critical care physicians, critical care 
nurses, and advanced medics, bringing a higher level 
of medical care closer to the POI and adding flexibility 
in the rapid deployment of aircraft to move patients 
via unregulated flight.
EVOLUTION OF MILITARY CASUALTY EVACUATION DOCTRINE
Organized evacuation of battle casualties is a 
relatively new advancement in the history of warfare. 
From the times of Greek hoplites and Roman legions 
until the 1800s, no systematic method of evacuating 
battlefield casualties existed. Wounded fighters had to 
evacuate themselves from the line and dress their own 
wounds, or depend on other soldiers to provide care. 
If the battle were won, those who were too wounded 
to march with the army were often quartered locally or 
in field hospitals constructed to care for these patients. 
Over time, the wounded would “triage” themselves 
by recovering and returning to duty, recovering but 
remaining unable to serve further, or dying. Wounded 
on the losing side did not fare as well. The lightly injured were captured and ransomed or sold as slaves; 
the more seriously injured were killed or left to die. 1
Larrey and Letterman
The Napoleonic Wars of the 19th century produced 
the “father” of modern military medicine and perhaps 
the greatest military surgeon who ever lived, Dominique Jean Larrey. Larrey was surgeon-in-chief of the 
Napoleonic armies from the French campaigns in Italy 
in 1797 to Waterloo in 1815. Larrey’s chief contribution 
to military medicine was the systematized evacuation 
of battlefield casualties using a field ambulance. The 
term “ambulance” comes from the Latin ambulare, 
meaning “to walk.” As it was used at the time, the 
term “ambulance” typically meant the field hospital (or 
the “walking hospital”) that followed the army. Prior 
to Larrey’s effort, field hospitals were located 3 miles 
behind the front. The wounded were typically left on 
the field until after the battle, sometimes receiving no 
care for 24 hours or more after injury. 2 Larrey, inspired 
by the speed and mobility of French artillery wagons, 
developed a system of medical wagons that were both 
mobile aid stations and evacuation platforms. These 
ambulance volantes or “flying ambulances” were staffed 
for, organized to support, and dedicated to the evacuation of the wounded.
Larrey’s ambulance corps was divided into three divisions of 113 personnel each. Each division was commanded by a chief surgeon and equipped with twelve 
light carriages and four heavy carriages, with each 
carriage manned by about seven men. Larrey’s ambulance configuration was both mobile and flexible—different equipment could be carried, and different draft 
animals (eg, camels in the Egypt campaign) could be 
used, depending on to the mission and environment. 3 
Larrey organized the care and evacuation of wounded 
like any other military operation: with a staff, chain 
of command, noncommissioned officers, and enlisted 
men under the leadership of a medical officer. 
Part of Larrey’s philosophy of rapid evacuation 
was based on his 24-hour principle of wound management. Previous surgical opinions recommended 
that amputation be performed in a delayed fashion, 
and only through gangrenous tissue. Larrey felt that 
in cases where an extremity could not be salvaged, 
rapid amputation while the soldier was still in shock, 
and before infection had set in, not only improved 
survival but also was more humane, especially during 
transport. He felt that patient movement on horseback 
or by wagon with a clean, well-dressed amputation was 
much more comfortable for the patient, causing less 
pain and fewer complications, than being transported 
with a shattered limb. Thus, Larrey was the first to 
recognize that time to treatment after injury was a key 
factor in casualty outcomes. His system of forward care 
on the field followed by rapid evacuation to surgical 
care in the field hospital formed the basis for modern 
medical evacuation systems. 2 
The defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo brought an 
end to prolonged war in Europe. A worldwide era of 
unprecedented industrial innovation and economic 
growth followed, setting the stage for even larger 
armies to be deployed during the American Civil 
War. Advances in transportation such as steamboats, 
locomotives, and railway lines made it possible for 
large numbers of troops to be moved rapidly in an 
orderly manner. Food preservation techniques such 
as canning and dehydration were improved. Weapons 
technology was enhanced. The smooth-bore musket of 
Napoleon’s era was notoriously inaccurate; thus, tactics 
dictated tight formations exchanging volley fire at close 
range. During the American Civil War, however, the 
rifled musket firing the 0. 58-caliber minié ball was the 
principal weapon used by both sides. In contrast to the 
smooth-bore musket, the rifled musket was accurate 
up to 500 yards. Unfortunately, military tactics did not 
take into account the capabilities of these new weapons; 
606
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
American generals on both sides of the Civil War still 
studied and employed Napoleonic tactics. Maneuvering large, tightly packed, linear formations against 
fortified positions produced devastating results and 
caused unprecedented numbers of casualties during 
Civil War battles. 
Likewise, military medical leaders in the US Army 
did not recognize that the nature of warfare had 
changed from small frontier engagements to warfare 
on a massive scale. At the outbreak of the war, the 
Union Army’s medical department was completely 
unprepared. Physicians were often graduates of 
unregulated, 2-year medical schools, and few had 
any training in surgical care or battlefield injuries. 
Most military leaders did not anticipate a prolonged, 
large-scale conflict. Additionally, previous campaigns 
against Indians and the recent Mexican-American 
War (1846–1848) had resulted in only a few battle 
casualties. Most campaigns up until that time were 
short lived, and most deaths were from disease. All 
US military conflicts from the Revolutionary War to 
1860 had resulted in slightly more than 23,000 killed 
in action or wounded, whereas in the Civil War, the 
Union side alone would ultimately suffer 600,000 killed 
or wounded. 4 
The First Battle of Manassas, or Bull Run, in July 
1861, was the first significant ground battle of the 
war. The medical evacuation plan was essentially 
improvised at the regimental level. 5 Wagons to carry 
the wounded were driven by civilian teamsters, 
many of whom fled from the field at the first sound 
of gunfire. As a result, many Union wounded were 
left on the field and along the roadside for several 
days until they could be recovered. The ensuing 
scandal led to the eventual appointment of Major 
Jonathan Letterman, MD, as the medical director of 
the Army of the Potomac, and Letterman’s establishment of the Ambulance Corps in August 1862. 6 
In 1864, Congress approved Letterman’s casualty 
care plan, with few changes, for adoption by the 
entire Union Army. 
Letterman’s plan, like Larrey’s, authorized an 
ambulance corps controlled by a physician medical 
director for each army corps. Wagons were dedicated 
specifically to the mission of evacuating casualties 
and were under the control of medical officers, not 
the quartermaster. Medical directors established 
standards for personnel, equipment, and training. 
Casualties were treated close to the field, moved to 
division- or corps-level field hospitals, and then eventually transported to larger fixed facilities in Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington, DC. Although still 
significantly understaffed and strained throughout 
the war, Letterman’s system of evacuation through 
echelons of care from the POI, through division and 
corps field hospitals, to a fixed brick-and-mortar 
hospital for definitive care and convalescence, would 
serve as the model for most industrialized nations 
into the next century.
Total War
The advancement of military weapons and technology, combined with nearly 40 years of peace among the 
major powers, set the stage for the horrific numbers of 
battlefield casualties during World War I. The absence 
of a major conflict in the preceding decades meant 
that tactical and operational concepts that accounted 
for long-range, rapid-fire precision artillery; machine 
guns; or improved, breech-loading, bolt-action rifles 
using modern cartridges and smokeless gunpowder 
had yet to be understood or developed. These military 
advances, as well as improvements in communication, 
organization, and transportation, enabled massive 
numbers of soldiers, inspired by nationalist fervor, to 
meet in battle armed with new weapons and unprecedented destructive power. 
Several medical developments had occurred during 
the relatively peaceful period between the US Civil 
War and World War I. Lister’s principles of asepsis 
were introduced. The individual battle dressing, or 
field dressing, was developed for issue to individual 
soldiers. Henry Dunant’s humanitarian-focused Red 
Cross movement expanded in the United States and 
Europe. In Britain, the Red Cross partnered with the 
St John Ambulance Association, a first-aid-focused 
organization that operated in the major cities teaching first aid concepts to workers in industrial centers 
and other civilians. World War I was the first major 
conflict with specially trained “medics” assigned to 
combat formations who moved about the battlefield 
rendering aid and evacuating the injured. It was also 
the first war in which combat deaths outnumbered 
those from disease.
The destructive firepower of the first modern 
industrial war quickly resulted in a stalemate at the 
front. Trench warfare characterized combat on the 
Western front as combatants sought protection from 
the powerful artillery barrages and machine gun fire in 
trenches and bunkers. These emplacements remained 
relatively static during the war, and both sides suffered 
incredible numbers of casualties trying to win the new 
type of warfare. 
Casualty care during World War I began at the POI. 
The wounded soldier performed whatever self-aid he 
could, or perhaps his comrades would provide initial 
care. At the company aid post, medics focused on 
sorting patients (“triage”), bandaging wounds, and 
607
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
splinting any fractures to minimize pain and additional injury during litter transport to the battalion or 
regimental aid post, located 250 to 500 yards behind 
the line. Once there, splints and dressings were examined and adjusted if necessary, and morphine and 
anti-tetanus serum were administered. The patients 
were wrapped in blankets and given hot drinks to 
keep them warm. Treatment was noted on a casualty 
tag attached to the patient. 
The wounded were then carried by litter to the ambulance dressing station. These stations were located 
as far forward as safely possible. During the day this 
was 3,000 to 6,000 yards from the front, located along 
a road at a relatively protected point such as a building or cellar if possible. If a litter transport more than 
800 to 1,000 yards from the battalion aid post was 
required, relay stations might be set up where litter 
teams handed off patients for the next stage. It was 
often safer to move ambulance dressing stations farther 
forward at night and evacuate patients under the cover 
of darkness, saving a long and often dangerous litter 
transport during daylight. 
At the ambulance dressing stations, casualties were 
re-triaged by medical officers. Casualties in severe 
shock or those deemed non-transportable were held 
until they improved or died. From the ambulance 
dressing stations, casualties requiring further care 
were evacuated to a field hospital. For the first time in 
history, large numbers of casualties were transported 
by motorized ambulance. Ambulances made by Ford, 
Fiat, Peugeot, and General Motors proved their value 
in terms of speed and patient comfort under brutal 
combat conditions. 7,8 Overall, in the American Expeditionary Forces, the time from wounding until the 
arrival at the first triage point was 5 to 6 hours. 8
Field hospitals, where surgical care was first 
available, were located 6 to 8 miles from the front, 
out of artillery range. Time from injury at the front 
lines until arrival at the first surgical care varied 
depending on road conditions, intensity of combat 
operations, visibility, and similar factors. Personnel 
at field hospitals would evaluate and triage patients 
once again. Casualties stayed a few hours to a few 
days at the field hospital, depending on the nature 
of their wounds and the level of combat and casualty 
flow. Cases that could not be returned to duty but 
who were stable for further transport were moved 
to evacuation hospitals. Those casualties deemed 
nontransportable (ie, those who were likely to die 
during further transport without immediate surgical 
care) were retained at the field hospital. These cases 
typically included three classes: open (or “sucking”) 
chest wounds; perforating abdominal wounds; and 
severe hemorrhage cases. Casualties requiring neurosurgical care tended to stand transportation better 
before an operation than after and were typically 
sent forward. 8 
Field hospitals were essentially emergency hospitals or more robust dressing/triage stations, and more 
intensive medical and surgical care was provided at 
the evacuation hospital. Army Expeditionary Forces 
evacuation hospitals were typically 1,000-bed facilities located alongside a railway line between 9 and 15 
miles from the front. Casualties reached the evacuation 
hospital on average 10 to 16 hours following triage at 
the field hospital. In addition to serving the wounded 
who required immediate surgical care before they 
could be transported further, evacuation hospitals 
served as relay or clearing stations in the hospitalization and evacuation chain. Patients were transported 
from evacuation hospitals by train to a system of base 
hospitals and then on to fixed facilities throughout 
France and England for definitive care and convalescence. At each stage of the evacuation chain, those 
who would not survive transport would be held until 
they improved or died. Those with minor injuries were 
returned to duty, and those who required further care 
were sent on through the chain. 9 
World War II
The world wars of the 20th century saw the development of the internal combustion engine and motorized 
ambulances that could carry casualties through “echelons of care.” While the Western front was relatively 
static in the First World War, World War II was a war 
of speed and mobility. Armored vehicles, which had 
emerged in rudimentary forms during World War I, 
were perfected and integrated into a combined arms 
strategy using air power, artillery, and infantry. Entire armored and mechanized divisions were fielded. 
The airplane had advanced significantly during the 
interwar period and would play a key role in moving 
men, materiel, and casualties across large distances 
in both the European and Pacific theaters of war. As 
surgical care advanced and military aviation developed, large numbers of casualties in World War II were 
able to receive forward stabilizing surgical care and 
subsequently be transported to a second hospital by 
airplane. Blood transfusions, advances in resuscitation 
science, antibiotics, and improvements in surgical technique revolutionized combat surgery and resulted in 
a reduction of the hospital case fatality rate in patients 
with abdominal or visceral wounds from 45% during 
World War I to 15% in World War II. 10
Evacuation in World War II operated on similar 
principles as during World War I. The goals at each 
stage or echelon of care were to provide only those 
608
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
treatments necessary to save lives and ensure patients 
were stable for transport to the next level. At each stage, 
those who could be safely returned to duty were sent 
back to their units, and those who required further 
treatment continued through the evacuation chain. 
Those who could not recuperate within 4 to 6 months 
in theater were evacuated back to the United States. 
During the war, fixed-wing aeromedical evacuation 
became the principal method of transporting patients 
from forward hospitals to rear area facilities. 
EVOLUTION OF AEROMEDICAL EVACUATION
After the invention of the airplane in 1903, militaries around the world began to realize the implications 
aircraft and aviation would have on warfare. Airplanes 
would offer unprecedented new opportunities on 
the battlefield. Likewise, aviation’s implications for 
combat medicine were not lost on military medical planners. During World War I, several countries 
experimented with medical evacuation by aircraft, 
but safety, expense, and limited load capacities did 
not make casualty transport by aircraft feasible on 
a large scale until World War II. Large, fixed-wing 
aircraft functioned in the same role as the casualty 
trains of World War I. Intra-theater patient movement 
was accomplished on planes such as the Curtiss C-46 
Commando or the Douglas C-47 Skytrain, while intertheater transport required larger planes with greater 
range, such as the Douglas C-54 Skymaster. These 
planes would move more than one million casualties 
from forward evacuation hospitals to base hospitals in 
the rear. 11 In total, more than 1. 34 million patients were 
aeromedically transported during the war. 12 
The helicopter was introduced toward the end of 
World War II. Initially used to rescue the crew of a 
downed aircraft in the jungles of Burma, the first evacuation of combat casualties under fire by helicopter was 
done in Manila in 1945, when 75 to 80 soldiers were 
evacuated one or two at a time. 13 
Korea
Helicopter evacuation came to the fore during 
the Korean War. The Bell H-13 Sioux helicopter, an 
adaptation of the Bell commercial Model 47 was used 
to evacuate more than 20,000 casualties. 14 These helicopters were crude as evacuation platforms and lacked 
advanced navigation or communication capabilities. 
Because patients were in pods located outside the crew 
compartment, no medical care could be given during flight. Pilots sometimes received ad hoc medical 
training from surgeons at the receiving hospitals, but 
the pilot had to land the helicopter to render any aid.
Helicopter evacuation in the US Army evolved with 
a focus on speed of casualty transport to surgical care. 
For the first time, casualties could be taken from a remote, rugged location near the POI, and transported 
rapidly to surgical care, bypassing the intermediate 
stops through echelons of ground-based evacuation. 
Helicopter evacuation spared patients prolonged litter 
or ground ambulance transports over rough terrain 
through hostile territory, preventing much death and 
suffering.
Vietnam 
Military trauma systems built during the Korean 
and Vietnam eras steadily increased the survival rates 
of wounded soldiers. Helicopter evacuation underwent significant expansion and growth during the 
Vietnam era, when dedicated MEDEVAC helicopters 
were deployed en masse. The Bell UH-1, or “Huey,” 
was large enough to carry several patients as well as 
a combat medic who could provide care en route to 
the hospital. Rapid evacuation to surgical care is often 
cited as one of the principal reasons for the significant 
reduction in battlefield mortality during the Vietnam 
conflict compared to other wars of the 20th century. 
Helicopter MEDEVAC (referred to as “DUST-OFF” 
after its motto: “Dedicated, Unhesitating Service to Our 
Fighting Forces”) epitomizes modern battlefield care 
whereby an injured soldier can be whisked from the 
battlefield to surgical care within minutes of wounding. Indeed, the icon of modern battlefield medicine 
is the MEDEVAC helicopter.
Late 20th Century
During the postwar period following Vietnam, US 
and NATO military planning remained focused on 
fighting Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces on the plains 
of Europe. Large-scale, intensive combat with massive numbers of conventional battlefield wounded, as 
well as casualties from nuclear and chemical warfare, 
were expected. Combat was expected to be fast paced, 
highly mobile, and conducted day and night in all 
weather conditions. 
MEDEVAC doctrine continued to focus on rapidly 
clearing the battlefield. Speed, aircraft performance, 
and communications were key priorities for MEDEVAC commanders. Little, if any, attention was given 
to the medical care provided by the flight medic. No 
substantive medical treatment was expected in a fully 
loaded aircraft carrying multiple casualties staffed 
609
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
with only a single flight medic. From the Vietnam era 
until 2012, the flight medic was trained only at the basic 
combat medic level and had no requirement for any 
hands-on patient care experience during their training. 
During this period, civilian air ambulance services 
proliferated. The first one was established in 1970. 
By 1992, more than 220 helicopter ambulance services were established in the United States. 15 Although 
initially modeled on the military’s rapid transport 
model, the emerging civilian model evolved with a 
“care is critical” philosophy whereby highly trained 
and skilled providers were matched with specific 
patients’ medical needs, bringing tertiary level care 
to the patient during transport. 16 As civilian helicopter 
emergency medical service (HEMS) evolved to bring 
resuscitation to the patient, the military model continued to focus on bringing the patient as rapidly as 
possible to resuscitation. 
US forces were involved in several small conflicts in 
the 1980s and 1990s, including operations in Grenada, 
Iraq, Kuwait, Panama, Somalia, and Kosovo. In all 
instances, combat operations were short-lived, with 
relatively few casualties. No trends emerged during 
these limited conflicts to challenge the Cold War model 
of evacuation. During the same period, civilian HEMS 
models became increasingly sophisticated. 
On October 3, 1993, the most intense conflict involving US forces since the Vietnam War took place 
in Mogadishu, Somalia. This conflict revealed some 
hints about the future of what would be called “asymmetric warfare.” The challenges of fighting in an urban 
environment, such as the vulnerability of helicopters, 
difficulty of finding landing zones and resulting 
prolonged care in the field, and delayed evacuation 
heralded conditions to come during Operation Iraqi 
Freedom almost a decade later in Fallujah, Sadr City, 
and other heavily populated urban areas. 17
Evacuation Lessons From Iraq and Afghanistan
Iraq
When US and coalition forces invaded Iraq and Afghanistan following the World Trade Center bombing 
of September 11, 2001, the military medical evacuation 
model remained focused on time, or rapidly clearing 
the battlefield of casualties. Further, US evacuation 
doctrine was directed toward military combat casualties from the POI to surgical care. It did not anticipate 
the large numbers of pediatric, medical, and critical 
care transports that would be encountered in the battlescapes of Iraq and Afghanistan. 
During the initial maneuver phase of the war, nonstandard CASEVAC vehicles or MEDEVAC ground 
or air ambulances were often the modes of evacuation 
to the rear. Casualties entered the evacuation chain 
at different levels. Sometimes they were transported 
to an aid station (Role 1) or a brigade support medical company (Role 2), where they were stabilized by 
non-surgeon medical staff and then transported by 
MEDEVAC to a forward surgical team (FST). In some 
instances, casualties were transported directly from 
the POI to small, mobile FSTs. After surgical stabilization, casualties would be transferred from the FSTs 
to forward hospitals (Role 3), usually by MEDEVAC 
helicopters. 
In the later phase of the war, a large and robust system of Role 3 facilities was established near most populated areas in Iraq. Compared to Afghanistan, Iraq’s 
road and highway infrastructure was well developed, 
with significant urban and suburban populations 
centered along the Tigris and Euphrates river valleys. 
Medical assets were robust and located near the areas 
of most military operations. FSTs were consolidated 
with Role 3 facilities to provide a more robust surgical and critical care capability. Battalion aid stations 
(Role 1) or brigade support medical companies (Role 
2) were often bypassed by MEDEVAC because surgical 
care was often close by. Military medical planners had 
adopted the “golden hour” concept in Iraq and were 
able to attain an average evacuation time of 55 minutes 
for seriously injured casualties. Evacuation times from 
one battalion aid station in Baghdad ranged from 20 
minutes to 2 hours during major combat operations, 
with an average of about 25 minutes. 18
Challenges during the transfer of postoperative 
patients aboard MEDEVAC helicopters were noted 
early in Iraq. A number of cases were described in 
which patients were stabilized at an FST, transferred 
to Role 3 by MEDEVAC, and arrived either dead or in 
extremis. 19 At that time, MEDEVAC helicopters were 
staffed by a single combat medic credentialed at the 
Emergency Medical Technician-Basic (EMT-B) level. 
These medics were not typically qualified to manage 
patients requiring critical care or advanced resuscitative procedures, such as airway and ventilator management, advanced pharmacology, or blood product 
administration. It was common for new flight medics 
to encounter their first seriously injured or ill patient 
on their first mission in combat. 
Treatment protocols, documentation, medical direction, and quality improvement processes were not 
standardized and varied significantly across US Army 
helicopter evacuation units, nor were these processes 
integrated with the overall trauma system. This is in 
contrast to civilian HEMS systems that operate within 
the United States, the United Kingdom (UK), and 
most European countries. Current civilian helicopter 
610
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
evacuation platforms are routinely staffed by critical 
care trained flight paramedics or comparably trained 
flight nurses, operating under the medical direction 
of physicians with emergency medical service (EMS) 
training, and using formalized protocols, standardized patient care documentation, and rigorous quality 
improvement processes. 20 
In 2004, the theater trauma director published 
clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) that directed physicians or nurses trained in critical care to augment 
postoperative transfers from Role 2 to Role 3. 21 While 
the CPG provided detailed instructions for critical care 
transport, no additional personnel were dedicated to 
this mission by the US military, so the critical care providers would have to come from the transferring Role 
2 or the receiving Role 3 facility. At the tactical level, 
this resulted in the difficult decision of either sending 
a key provider from a small forward team during combat operations, thus degrading the effectiveness of the 
team; sending a provider from the receiving Role 3 to 
the pick-up point; or transporting the patient with a 
minimally trained flight medic. When providers were 
sent from an FST or combat support hospital, they 
often lacked any formal in-flight critical care training 
or experience. A mix of all three techniques were used, 
and all presented particular logistical and patient care 
challenges. 22 
The incidence of poor outcomes during MEDEVAC 
in Iraq is unknown. No standardized patient care 
record, chart review, or performance improvement 
process was in place. Documentation of care during 
a MEDEVAC flight was not required as part of the 
medical record, and thus was not subject to review 
or analysis performed by the Joint Theater Trauma 
System. 
Afghanistan
After major combat operations ended in Iraq in 
2009, combat and stability operations in Afghanistan 
became a primary focus of the US and its coalition 
partners. Afghanistan presented many different challenges than fighting in Iraq. Afghanistan, in contrast 
to Iraq, is a vast and sparsely populated country with 
numerous mountain ranges, poor road networks, and 
primitive infrastructure. Combat forces were widely 
dispersed. Unlike in Iraq, most medical evacuations to 
surgical care in Afghanistan could only be conducted 
by MEDEVAC helicopter (ground transport was not 
practical nor safe based on lack of infrastructure, 
distance to receiving facilities, and semipermissive 
environments). 
Conditions in Iraq had begun challenging the ColdWar-era legacy MEDEVAC model; in Afghanistan, 
distance and time magnified the challenges of the 
asymmetric, nonlinear battlefield. The operational 
environment caused stress to the legacy MEDEVAC 
model with (a) increased numbers of postoperative 
critical care patients being transported from Role 2 to 
Role 3; (b) unprecedented numbers of civilian transports including pediatric, geriatric, and medical cases 
similar to those seen in civilian EMS; and (c) massively 
injured polytrauma patients, who would have died in 
previous conflicts, being kept alive by tactical combat 
casualty care, improved protective equipment, and 
access to early surgery. 
Gaps in en route critical care capability in Afghanistan were noted as early as 2002. 23 Since then, efforts 
were made to overcome these institutional gaps 
by tactical-level providers and commanders on the 
ground doing the actual day-to-day mission. These 
ad hoc fixes included mandating licensed medical 
providers (physicians, physician assistants, nurses) 
to fly on MEDEVAC platforms; sending flight medics 
to civilian paramedic training programs between deployments; deploying critical care nurses to augment 
MEDEVAC crews; using paramedic-trained US Air 
Force pararescue personnel to perform MEDEVAC; 
and employing the tiered dispatch of higher capability 
units such as the British Medical Emergency Response 
Team (MERT) for the most severely injured patients, 
particularly in the south and southwest of Afghanistan. 
Similar to the Army field surgeons’ experience in 
Iraq,19 the deployed theater trauma director in Afghanistan in 2009 noted a number of anecdotal cases where 
patients had left a Role 2 facility following surgery 
and had deteriorated significantly or died en route 
to the Role 3. While Role 2 to Role 3 flights in Iraq 
were usually much shorter,22 postoperative transfers 
in Afghanistan before 2009 often took over an hour to 
several hours, averaging 1. 5 hours. 24 In January 2009, 
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates prioritized the need 
to decrease evacuation times to under 1 hour. More 
FSTs and medical evacuation assets were deployed, 
and by December that year, the average evacuation 
time in Afghanistan had been reduced from 100 to 42 
minutes. 25 
The 2004 CPG published in Iraq still recommended 
that a nurse or physician accompany postoperative 
patients. However, many FSTs, already small in size, 
were now being split into two 10-person teams in Afghanistan to achieve the 1-hour standard mandated 
by Secretary Gates. The smaller FSTs were then even 
less able to give up a provider to accompany a patient 
during evacuation. In response to the reports of poor 
patient outcomes following postoperative transfer by 
MEDEVAC, the theater trauma director initiated a 
request for forces for the deployment of critical care 
611
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
nurses to augment the MEDEVAC crews during these 
flights. These en route critical care nurses arrived in 
Afghanistan in 2010 without predeployment training 
or recent flight experience, yet they and subsequent 
groups were able to perform at high standards. Patient documentation and quality assurance measures 
were put in place, and the outcomes of postoperative 
patients improved. 26
Between December 2008 and October 2009, a US 
Army National Guard MEDEVAC unit was deployed 
in southern and eastern Afghanistan with a unique 
crew: nearly 75% of its flight medics were credentialed 
and experienced EMT-Paramedics who actively practiced in the United States before deployment. These 
medics had an average of 9 years’ field experience 
and extensive training in critical care transport prior 
to deploying. They brought civilian HEMS protocols, 
documentation, medical direction, staffing, and process improvement standards to their MEDEVAC unit, 
effectively adapting their civilian expertise to the military environment in Afghanistan. An analysis of this 
group’s performance demonstrated a 66% reduction 
in casualties’ risk of death at 48 hours compared to 
the standard MEDEVAC units deployed before and 
after them. 20 
The MERT, consisting of a large CH-47 Chinook 
helicopter staffed with a physician, a nurse, two paramedics, and a ground security force, also appeared 
to improve the survival of the most seriously injured 
casualties. The MERT was created for use in Iraq for 
rapid incident response and deployed in southern 
Afghanistan in 2006. In Afghanistan, the extensive 
battle area in the UK’s area of responsibility led to 
the far-forward employment of critical care assets. 
UK forces leveraged the experience of many of their 
deployed clinicians in HEMS. Initially, the MERT’s 
medical component consisted of a general medical 
officer delivering advanced trauma care. As the fielding of this team evolved, UK forces scaled their MERT 
response to add physicians as needed, extending the 
forward care and life-saving interventions they can 
provide. It is important to note, though, that MERTs 
were employed only in areas in which air superiority 
or air supremacy had been established. It would be 
premature to extrapolate the MERT’s current success 
to other phases of battle in which air superiority has 
not been achieved. 27 
At coalition regional patient evacuation coordination centers, staffed in southwestern Afghanistan 
around the clock by experienced trauma nurses, the 
appropriate evacuation platform based on the patients 
care needs was dispatched. This clinically based dispatch model was aimed at optimizing the patient’s care 
during transport. The MERT was dispatched for the 
most severely wounded; US Air Force Pararescue (with 
two paramedics, call sign PEDRO) were dispatched 
for advanced life support cases or in nonpermissive 
environments; and DUSTOFF (with a single EMTB medic) for all others. Even when the PEDRO or 
DUSTOFF units have a more rapid response, a MERT 
was dispatched preferentially for the most severe cases 
so that advanced resuscitation could be started as soon 
as possible. If a MERT had a 15-minute response time 
to the POI, for example, and a DUSTOFF unit had 
a 10-minute response with a 10-minute subsequent 
flight to Role 2 or 3, the MERT would be dispatched 
so that resuscitation began in 15 versus 20 minutes. 
This tiered response system was unique to one region 
of Afghanistan. 28
Specialized Teams
For longer-range transport, beyond the rapid response of a DUSTOFF or MERT unit from the POI, the 
US Air Force Aeromedical Evacuation system provides 
fixed-wing movement of regulated casualties with extensively trained aircrew, which can be tasked across 
the full spectrum of military operations. 29 Traditional 
aeromedical evacuation teams consist of two flight 
nurses and three aeromedical evacuation technicians, 
with specialty training to care for patients on a variety 
of opportune aircraft, primarily the C-130 Hercules, 
the C-17 Globemaster, and the KC-135 Stratotanker. 
In the early 1990s, the US Air Force surgeon general, 
Lieutenant General P.K. Carlton, had envisioned a 
critical care air transport team (CCATT) to serve as a 
mobile intensive care unit, augmenting a traditional 
aeromedical evacuation mission to provide expert care 
for critically ill casualties. 
CCATTs now consist of a critical care physician, a 
critical care nurse, and a respiratory therapist, capable 
of caring for a number of ventilated casualties while 
simultaneously providing ongoing resuscitative interventions in-flight. 30 Combat casualties surviving 
extensive, multi-system trauma and stabilized in theater via damage control surgery can now be evacuated 
safely and rapidly to the United States, often within 
48 to 72 hours of the initial injury. Specialized critical 
care personnel can also augment CCATTs to support 
patients with additional requirements, including the 
use of more advanced ventilation protocols and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. 
Special Operations Teams
The Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) developed its own en route care capabilities 
to meet special operations forces (SOF) mission sets. 
612
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
The earliest AFSOC en route care specialists were the 
Special Operations Forces Medical Element (SOFME) 
teams, comprised of a flight surgeon (typically an 
internship-trained flight surgeon) and two independent duty medical technicians. 31 These teams had 
in-garrison base-operating support duties and were 
on alert at all times for forward taskings. As AFSOC 
physician assistants (PAs) proved their worth in the 
SOF medical arena, it became increasingly common for 
PAs to serve in the SOFME teams in place of the flight 
surgeon. 32 The SOFME role evolved in the post-9/11 
world of increasing operations tempo and expanding 
SOF application in global engagement. The SOFME 
operational medical pipeline is robust and has come 
to involve clinical skills (eg, Advanced Trauma Life 
Support, Prehospital Trauma Life Support, Tactical 
Combat Casualty Care, aeromedical disposition) and 
tactical skills (the AFSOC CASEVAC course, field skills 
training, and small unit tactics). 33 SOFME teams are 
located on multiple continents and engage in everything from combat CASEVAC to multilateral training 
with partner nations and humanitarian assistance/
disaster response.
The success of the Air Force CCATT and Mobile 
Forward Surgical Team (MFST; a five-person surgical team able to carry its own gear and walk into a 
location) led to the next generation of SOF medical 
support. The advent of the Special Operations Surgical Team (SOST) and Special Operations Critical Care 
Evacuation Team (SOCCET) changed the landscape 
of SOF medical support capability. Now, theater SOF 
teams had far-forward damage control surgical support with embedded intensive care capability. SOST/
SOCCET personnel are highly trained medical and 
surgical professionals who must keep their medical 
skills up to date. 34 In addition, their pipeline training 
requires awareness of small unit tactics, field skills, 
and essential SOF field support capability. 
These teams were initially designed to operate independently as needed, but their field application more 
often required joint basing in support of ground force 
SOF operations. SOST/SOCCET teams have worked 
successfully in many forward settings, ranging from 
combat support to humanitarian assistance/disaster 
response. 35 As it became increasingly clear that their 
predominant use was in support of ground operations, 
in 2012 the command surgeon of the 24th Special Operations Wing coordinated AFSOC’s plan to place the 
SOST/SOCCET units under the command of the 720th 
Special Tactics Group. This strategic move paved the 
way for major advances in the organization, training, 
equipping, and application of these mission-critical 
medical support assets. SOST/SOCCET units based in 
the continental United States are embedded at civilian 
trauma centers, a unique feature. 36 As self-contained, 
geographically separated units, teams live and work 
at busy civilian trauma centers, honing their critical 
care and surgical skills. Always on-call, they are able 
to respond rapidly to the next SOF support mission 
anywhere in the world. 
EVACUATION IN FUTURE CONFLICTS
The Operational Environment
Cold War-era MEDEVAC doctrine emphasized 
clearing the battlefield and relieving the fighting troops 
of the burden of casualty care. In today’s conflicts, the 
challenge for medical evacuation is to provide state-ofthe-art care to patients; this will likely be true in future 
asymmetric conflicts as well. Indeed, the aim of current 
NATO evacuation doctrine is “to provide a standard of 
medical care which is as close as possible to prevailing 
peacetime standards, and follows the principles of best 
medical practice, while acknowledging the operational 
posture and environment.”37 
In the foreseeable future, US military operational 
environments are likely to be much more complex and 
challenging than the relatively stable settings of the 
Cold War, where one large, constant, and discernible 
threat was the focus. Today, threats are numerous, 
poorly understood, difficult to identify, and unpredictable. Radical Islam, rogue states possessing weapons 
of mass destruction, regional instability in the Middle 
East and northern Africa, international criminal activity, a rising China with a culture and history unknown 
to most in the West, the threat of pandemic disease, 
environmental and natural disasters, and global economic instability all create a complex environment 
for military and military medical planners. No longer 
is rapid evacuation through echelons of care within a 
defined battle area or front line axiomatic. 
Armed conflict will likely remain asymmetric because 
most nations and non-state actors cannot match US and 
NATO forces in conventional air-land battle. Asymmetric war will be fought in urban areas where enemy forces 
will attempt to negate the superior technology, mobility, 
and firepower of the United States and its allies. Civilians 
will be encountered and will be purposefully put into 
harm’s way as opposing forces seek not only to burden 
the medical system, but also to create the appearance of 
atrocities and civilian deaths as a result of US and allied 
actions. Intensive military operations in urban environments will create difficulties in evacuation similar to 
those seen in Mogadishu and Fallujah. 38 
613
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
Evacuation will often be delayed, necessitating 
prolonged care in the field. Unarmed MEDEVAC 
helicopters will be vulnerable to small arms fire and 
rocket-propelled grenades, and landing zones will 
be limited. Casualties will be carried by hand on litters and moved by nonstandard CASEVAC vehicles 
to forward aid stations and forward surgical care, 
or transported outside the city where landing zones 
can be secured. A newly evolving capability, the US 
Air Force tactical critical care evacuation team (with 
an emergency/critical care physician, certified nurse 
anesthetist, and emergency/critical care nurse) will 
provide substantial clinical capability, available on a 
variety of platforms, with minimal staffing and equipment. Future conflicts will certainly require use of this 
light, life-saving capability.
Following the withdrawal of combat forces in 
Afghanistan, political and economic pressures will 
make another prolonged conflict politically unpopular unless vital interests are directly threatened. 
Expeditionary operations will likely be the norm. 
Large, robust, fixed forward medical facilities will 
not be in place, especially during initial entry operations. Yet state-of-the-art care for US forces will 
be expected, especially given the low case fatality 
rates during operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Combat casualty survival in such an environment 
will require expert prehospital care and an evacuation chain that emphasizes advanced far-forward 
damage control resuscitation focused on airway 
management, resuscitation with blood products, 
and hemorrhage control. 39 
Military planners have described “an arc of instability,” extending from the Mediterranean Sea to the Sea 
of Japan, where future conflicts are most likely to arise. 
This region encompasses vast geographic areas such 
as Africa, the Indonesian archipelago, the Indian subcontinent, and the South Pacific. Conducting medical 
evacuation in these areas poses significant problems, 
and the golden hour requirement will be difficult to 
attain. US MEDEVAC doctrine will require a fundamental cultural change that focuses on extending the 
golden hour by bringing skillful advanced resuscitation to the patient in the manner of civilian HEMS 
systems or the British MERT. Expeditionary medical 
support will not have a robust holding capability. Patients will be moved mostly by air, and resuscitation 
will be ongoing throughout transport. 
In the event of a large-scale conventional war or a 
period of intensive conflict in a smaller war, military 
medical planners may have the option of implementing a “mass casualty” protocol that would return to 
the Cold War goal of rapidly clearing the battlefield. 
Evacuation platform staffing, treatment protocols, 
and patient loads could then be modified according to the tactical situation based on predetermined 
criteria. 
Finally, the military medical evacuation systems 
must take into account domestic and international 
disaster support. Military forces offer a tremendous 
resource to governments following disasters. The 
military’s logistics and communications capabilities, 
in conjunction with efficient command and control 
mechanisms and expeditionary medicine expertise, 
will continue to be called upon during large-scale humanitarian crises. An evacuation system that operates 
under the local standard of care will be more adept 
and more easily integrated into the disaster response.
Principles of Evacuation for Future Conflicts
Overall System Design
The key element in providing quality patient care 
given the available resources is the design of the prehospital care and evacuation system. Evacuation concepts 
have carried over from war to war, often based in historical precedent, convenience, and military tradition 
rather than on a deliberate analysis of patient care needs 
by experts. Evacuation systems in future conflicts will 
benefit from a systems analysis approach with patient 
outcomes as the primary driver. Although resources 
and military exigencies must be accounted for, keeping 
the wounded casualty at the center of the system design 
process allows deliberate policy decisions to be made 
with the focus on optimizing patient care. 
Medical Direction and Oversight
Active supervision of the evacuation system by physicians who practice and have expertise in emergency, 
critical care, and critical care transport medicine is 
required to optimize patient outcomes. 40 The medical 
director should have oversight and accountability of 
all aspects of the system related to patient care. This 
includes training and clinical supervision of prehospital providers, development and fielding of patient 
care protocols, selection of medical equipment, and 
quality assurance processes including chart/case 
review, research, and process improvement efforts. 
The medical director must be competent in providing 
and supervising patient care in the field and should 
participate in direct patient care in the field on a regular basis. Regular exposures to conditions in the field 
are the only way to fully understand how the system 
functions and where improvements need to be made. 40 
Patients cared for in the evacuation system are the 
responsibility of the system’s medical director. The 
614
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
non-physician providers in the system are practicing 
under the license of the medical director; therefore, 
the medical director should not be subordinate to the 
commander of the evacuation system but should be 
free to make decisions and give orders related to the 
provision of clinical care. He or she must be the final 
authority over all clinical aspects of the evacuation 
system. This prehospital specialist, or “prehospitalist,” will change the battlespace not only by applying 
advanced skills in the administration and oversight 
of prehospital care systems, but also by bringing to 
bear specific clinical skills designed for prehospital, 
austere, and en route care settings. The Department of 
Defense (DoD) currently trains such “prehospitalists” 
in a 2-year accredited fellowship based at a Level 1 
military trauma center.
Dispatch and Response
Requests for medical evacuation by US forces require transmission of a “9-line” report (Table 39-1). 
TABLE 39-1
STANDARD 9-LINE MEDEVAC REQUEST 
FORMAT
Line 1 Location of pick-up site
Line 2 Radio frequency, call sign, and suffix
Line 3 Number of patients of precedence 
(A-Urgent, B-Urgent surgical, C-Priority, DRoutine, E-Convenience)
Line 4 Special equipment required
(A-None, B-Hoist, C-Extraction equipment, DVentilator)
Line 5 Number of patients
(A-Litter, B-Ambulatory)
Line 6 Security at pick-up site (in peacetime, number and 
types of wounds, injuries, illness)
(A- No Enemy in area, B-Possible enemy in area, 
C-Enemy in area, D-Enemy in area & armed escort 
required)
Line 7 Method of marking site
(A-Panels, B-Pyrotechnic, C-Smoke, D-None, EOther)
Line 8 Patient nationality and status
(A-US Military, B-US Civilian, C-Non-US Military, 
D-Non-US citizen, E-EPW)
Line 9 NBC (in peacetime: terrain description at pick-up 
site)
(N-Nuclear, B-Biological, C-Chemical)
EPW: enemy prisoner of war
The “9-line” focuses mostly on tactical considerations; 
only two parts deal with patients. Line 3 lists numbers 
of patients by precedence (urgent, urgent surgical, 
priority, routine, and convenience) and line 5 lists the 
number of patients who are on litters and those who 
are ambulatory. Because the order of clinical precedence of the patients is subjective, “over-triage” is 
common using this process; providers on the ground 
often assign a higher priority than is needed. The recent 
addition of the MIST (mechanism, injury type, signs, 
and treatment given) report to the 9-line provides 
injury mechanism data with physiologic data similar 
to civilian trauma center transport guidelines. 41 While 
the current American College of Surgeons (ACS) 
guidelines, which focus on civilian trauma systems, 
are too extensive for field use by military medics, the 
methodology proposed by the ACS guidelines should 
be applied to military trauma, with the development 
of military-specific criteria. Expanding on the prehospital MIST report concept, future evacuation systems 
should take into account physiologic, anatomic, and 
injury mechanism data to more accurately identify 
patients requiring aggressive forward resuscitation 
and rapid transport to forward surgical care.
Medical director involvement is required to ensure not only a well-structured dispatch process, but 
also dispatch of the appropriate evacuation capability based on patient needs. The patient evacuation 
coordination center or evacuation dispatch element 
must be staffed with trained and experienced medical 
personnel and should be collocated in key command 
and control communications centers to synchronize 
military operational, security, and medical evacuation 
operations. 
Evacuation Platforms 
Many vehicles can be used to move casualties. These 
may be dedicated ground and air ambulances marked 
with red crosses, staffed with medically trained personnel, and equipped for patient care, or they may 
be a nonmedical vehicle or aircraft without medical 
equipment or personnel. The type of vehicle used 
will depend on availability, weather, terrain, and the 
type and intensity of combat operations. A thorough 
mission analysis by military medical planners using 
the “PACE” methodology should identify a primary, 
alternate, contingency, and emergency method for 
evacuation. 
Ground ambulances are the principal method 
of moving patients from the forward edge of battle 
during conventional combat operations. A number 
of variations, each with different capabilities and 
patient load capacities, exist. Although a detailed 
615
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
discussion of each type is beyond the scope of this 
chapter, medical directors and planners should be 
intimately familiar with each ambulance configuration 
used in their area of operations. Ground ambulances 
are most appropriate for short transits on established 
road networks and across relatively flat, open terrain. Some ground ambulances are capable of limited 
transit across rugged terrain; however, their use in 
mountainous, jungle, and heavily forested regions 
will be limited to established road networks. Weather 
and illumination conditions may degrade the speed 
of ground ambulance transport, but generally will not 
inhibit ground evacuation. 
In Afghanistan, evacuation by helicopter has 
emerged as the principal method of transporting 
patients from the POI to forward surgery and from 
forward surgery to the combat support hospital. The 
MEDEVAC helicopter will continue to be the key 
method of casualty transport during low-intensity and 
asymmetric conflicts because these types of operations 
require a wide distribution of forces but a relative 
centralization of medical assets. In this environment, 
helicopters will be required to meet current time to 
surgical care guidelines. MEDEVAC helicopters can be 
dispatched directly to the POI and are able to retrieve 
patients from small landing zones or hoist them from 
the ground while hovering; thus, they are very effective in rugged or heavily forested terrain that may be 
inaccessible to ground ambulances. Unfortunately, 
patient care space is limited on helicopters. Noise, 
cabin lighting, and vibration make patient assessment 
and treatment difficult. Weather and illumination conditions may inhibit helicopter evacuation. Additionally, operations in urban environments will limit the 
use of MEDEVAC helicopters because landing zones 
are difficult to establish and unarmed helicopters are 
vulnerable to ground fire in dense urban areas.
Fixed-wing aircraft, such as the C-130 Hercules, 
are excellent forward evacuation platforms under 
certain circumstances. They have a large cargo area 
that provides significantly more workspace, and they 
travel at nearly twice the speed of helicopters, making them ideal for long-distance evacuation. Medical 
attendants are able to stand erect and move about. 
Along with substantially less noise and vibration 
than in a helicopter, this makes patient care and assessment easier to perform. Most fixed-wing cargo 
aircraft can readily be converted to carry a large 
number of litters.
However, evacuation by fixed-wing aircraft requires access to a suitable runway. Ground or helicopter evacuation is required to transport the patient from 
a forward treatment facility to the airfield. Requests 
for fixed-wing evacuation platforms will become more 
complex and time-consuming because these aircraft 
will often not be dedicated to forward medical evacuation. Medical crews and equipment, not typically 
assigned to the aircraft, will need to be assembled. 
Weather and illumination conditions may limit fixedwing evacuation, but to a lesser degree than helicopter 
transport. Fixed-wing evacuation, when available, is 
ideal for moving large numbers of casualties or those 
requiring intensive critical care over longer distances. 
When MEDEVAC helicopters are limited in urban 
warfare, moving casualties by ground to an airstrip 
outside of the urban area for fixed-wing evacuation 
may be a viable alternative. 
Navy en route care has taken a quantum leap forward with the advent of EMS board-certified medical 
directors; the development of standardized protocols, 
education, and training; and the evolution of joint en 
route care CPGs. Sea-basing of casualty collection and 
treatment, as well as specific en route care training for 
corpsmen, may revolutionize naval evacuation over 
vast distances in theaters such as the Pacific Command. 
Provider Staffing and Capability
A number of staffing models for both civilian air 
and ground ambulances exist. For ground ambulance services these include basic life support (BLS), 
EMT-B level; advanced life support (ALS) providers 
(paramedics); and in some instances, intermediatelevel providers capable of more advanced airway and 
vascular access techniques than EMT-Bs, yet lacking 
the advanced capabilities of paramedics. Most civilian 
air ambulance systems in the United States (93%) are 
staffed with two providers, most commonly a flight 
paramedic and flight nurse (67%). Other configurations include two flight nurses (8%), two flight paramedics (5%), and a single nurse or paramedic (3%). 42 
There have been no large prospective studies demonstrating an advantage of one staffing model over 
another. Physicians in North America rarely perform 
prehospital or field care, although in Europe many 
ground and air evacuation platforms are routinely 
staffed by physicians trained to provide prehospital 
care. 
Most military ambulances are staffed with at least 
two military medics, although Army MEDEVAC helicopters have traditionally been staffed with a single 
combat medic. Combat medics in the US Army are 
credentialed at the EMT-B level, but they are trained 
in more advanced techniques such as surgical airways, 
needle chest decompression, and intravenous as 
well as intraosseous access. While studies of military 
ground ambulance staffing models are lacking, several 
recent retrospective military studies have shown im616
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
proved patient outcomes related to helicopter evacuation platform staffed with critical care paramedics20 
and physicians. 43 
In addition to unprecedented numbers of civilian 
transports, operations in Afghanistan have challenged the conventional evacuation platform staffing 
model for US forces with (a) severely injured casualties with multiple traumatic injuries kept alive by 
advanced body armor and tactical combat casualty 
care, many whom would have died in past conflicts, 
and (b) increased numbers of postoperative cases. 
This pattern will likely continue in future scenarios. 
During a conventional conflict, military-age males 
with traumatic injuries will be the majority of patients 
transported, whereas in low-intensity and asymmetric 
conflicts, civilians of all ages as well as medical cases 
will frequently be transported. 44 Optimizing casualty outcomes in future conflicts requires MEDEVAC 
crews capable of meeting the needs of the patients 
transported across the full spectrum of conflict, from 
counterinsurgency operations to conventional combined arms battles. 
Evacuation times in combat can be incredibly 
variable, especially during the initial entry phase 
of operations. Expeditionary, initial entry, and 
special operations will therefore require forward 
medical personnel to accompany the wounded 
during what may be a prolonged evacuation. These 
medical assets must be trained, experienced, and 
competent in forward resuscitative care. Staffing 
models should be flexible and able to care for all 
types of patients that may be encountered. Using a 
tiered system (with separate critical care, ALS, and 
BLS responses) is feasible in a small geographic 
area such as described above in southeastern Afghanistan. However, such a tiered system would 
be difficult to implement across a large geographic 
area or during initial operations in an immature 
theater of war. Here, a single efficient and flexible 
staffing model capable of responding across the full 
spectrum of patient care needs is key. 
Although one provider may be adequate for most 
stable and routine transfers, two providers should 
be available for any seriously ill or injured patients. 
Evacuation platform providers should be capable of 
retrieving a severely injured casualty from the POI 
and performing stabilizing care (including advanced 
airway management, hemorrhage control, resuscitation with blood products, chest decompression, and 
pharmacologic therapy for sedation, pain, blood pressure support, and coagulopathy). Rather than simply 
transporting the casualty, the goal should be to begin 
resuscitation on retrieval and continue it until the 
patient reaches forward surgical care. This same team 
should be capable of transporting the same patient in 
the postoperative period to a definitive care hospital, 
continuing to provide critical care in transit.
Data and Quality Improvement 
Military medical providers are dedicated professionals committed to performing quality patient care 
during medical evacuation in extremely hazardous environments. Such high-quality patient care is expected 
not only by those in uniform who place themselves in 
harm’s way, but also by the political leaders, military 
commanders, and citizens of their respective nations 
who ask the military to risk life and limb for national 
defense. Though service members deserve the highest quality of care that can realistically be delivered in 
a combat setting, functional military systems of data 
collection, patient care documentation, and quality 
improvement processes were generally lagging until 
well into the mid-2010s.
Incomplete patient care data from the prehospital 
phase of care is the single greatest challenge to improving military medical care. A growing body of evidence 
suggests the prehospital phase (including evacuation) 
is the where the largest number of potentially salvageable deaths occur. 45 Yet fewer than 14% of casualties 
had any documentation of prehospital care on arrival 
to a surgical facility in Iraq and Afghanistan, according 
to a 2011 report. 46 Any effort to improve the quality of 
care during medical evacuation requires data; competency and quality of care cannot be demonstrated 
nor improved without data collection and documentation. 47 One cannot improve what one cannot measure, 
and one cannot measure without data. 48 
A detailed discussion of data collection systems, 
patient documentation, and quality improvement 
methods is beyond this scope of this chapter. However, 
the following general principles from “Data A–Z” by 
Mears49 should be mentioned:
 
• For any quality initiative, it is essential that 
data collection systems be created to measure 
the fundamental tenets of the EMS system—
patient care and service delivery.
 
• Data elements must be standardized and 
uniform, with consistent definitions.
 
• Generating a medical record holds EMS personnel accountable for their critical decisionmaking and patient care. Medical records also 
allow identification of educational needs and 
areas of improvement.
 
• Information systems should obtain a large portion 
of data passively from automated systems such 
as medical devices (monitors) and computers.
617
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
 
• EMS information systems should be strategic 
and clearly defined. The application of data 
should enhance patient care, not detract from 
it. Information systems should drive the EMS 
system, its service delivery, and its patient 
care.
 
• Data entry requirements must be balanced 
with patient care requirements. Extensive 
demographic data and other elements not 
immediately related to patient care should 
be deferred until the patient reaches a fixed 
facility. 
 
• If a data system is put into place without adequate training and support, the user experience will be negative. A negative user experience at this critical point can be devastating. 
 
• Technology is critical to the success of an 
information system, but can be damaging 
if it is applied inappropriately or before it is 
mature. 49
The main argument against prehospital data collection by field providers is that it is precluded by the 
chaotic nature of combat. While this may be true in 
some major combat operations at certain periods, the US 
Army’s 75th Ranger Regiment, one of the most heavily 
engaged combat units of the US forces, has successfully 
collected patient data on every casualty sustained during 
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. This data has been 
used to continuously improve the quality of the organization’s casualty response system. The 75th Ranger 
Regiment is also the only unit in the US military that has 
demonstrated zero potentially preventable deaths in the 
prehospital setting after more than a decade of combat. 50
Prehospital and evacuation patient care data must 
be captured, integrated, and synchronized with the patient’s medical record and the theater trauma system. 
With accurate evacuation care data, clinical benchmarks can be established, outcomes can be evaluated, 
and quality improvement initiatives implemented in 
a continuous cyclical process. 
MODEL FOR FUTURE CASUALTY CARE CONTINUUM SUCCESS
To replicate the successful trauma registries and 
trauma systems used by US civilian trauma centers, 
forward deployed trauma surgeons developed the 
Joint Theater Trauma System, which evolved into the 
Joint Trauma System (JTS), serving the DoD’s global 
operations. Housed at the US Army Institute of Surgical Research, the JTS is helping to enable a more structured approach to trauma care from POI to definitive 
care and rehabilitation. Recognizing that trauma care 
is a continuous and enduring DoD mission, the system 
was established to improve standards in trauma care 
across the continuum of care, built on standardized 
documentation, registry development, outcome analysis, performance improvement, and evidence-based 
medical practice across the entire continuum. The 
JTS continues to evolve, and its trauma registry has 
served as the model for similar registries in partner 
nation military medical systems. CPGs are published 
and routinely updated in an effort to optimize care 
for combat trauma both on the ground and in the air. 
This system is built to adapt to the current and future 
political, strategic, and operational needs of the DoD.
SUMMARY
Evacuation is a core military medical function. 
Enhanced en route care is the latest innovation in the 
history of medical evacuation. The interrelationship 
between military and civilian medicine in this field is 
clear: each community has made advances in medical 
evacuation, and each has adopted advances made by 
the other. While war has driven many of the current 
advances in prehospital combat casualty care (junctional tourniquets, hemostatic agents and dressings, 
telemedicine, and TCCC), civilian emphasis on critical care evacuation, quality assurance, protocols, and 
proactive medical direction is equally improving the 
landscape of prehospital military medicine.
For combat arms commanders, who place a premium on accomplishing the mission, the best possible 
care of the combat wounded is an absolute priority. In 
addition to the first-order effect of reducing mortality 
and morbidity, exceptional medical care and evacuation provide second- and third-order effects as well: 
combat troops undertake the mission with peace of 
mind, knowing the medical team is behind them, ready 
to take care of them and evacuate them to life-saving 
care each time they protect national interests by going 
into harm’s way.
REFERENCES
 
1. Lam DM. Medical evacuation, history, and development—the future in the multinational environment. Paper presented at: Research and Technology Organisation Human Factors and Medicine Specialists Meeting on the Impact of 
NATO/Multinational Military Missions on Health Care Management; September 4-6, 2000; Kiev, Ukraine.
618
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
2. Larrey DJ. Memoirs of Military Surgery and Campaigns of the French Armies. Vol I. Hall RH, trans. Baltimore, MD: Joseph 
Cushing/University Press of Sergeant Hall; 1814: 23.
 
3. Ortiz JM. The revolutionary flying ambulance of Napoleon’s surgeon. US Army Med Dep J. October-December 1998: 
17-25.
 
4. US Department of Veterans Affairs. America’s wars. http://www.va.gov/opa/publications/factsheets/fs_americas_wars.
pdf. Published November 2014. Accessed July 17, 2018.
 
5. Deaderick RD. Field Medical Support of the Army of the Potomac at the Battle of Gettysburg [research paper]. Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army War College; March 1989.
 
6. Greenwood JT. Hammond and Letterman: A Tale of Two Men Who Changed Army Medicine [research paper]. San Antonio, 
TX: Institute of Land Warfare; 03-1: June 2003. 
 
7. Runyan N. The Greatest Adventure: American Volunteer Ambulance Drivers in the First World War. [research paper]. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University; 2012. https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/downloads/2z10wr68s. Accessed August 
30, 2018.
 
8. Ginn RVN. World War I—the ambulance service. In: Ginn RVN. The History of the US Army Medical Service Corps. Washington, DC: Center of Military History; 1997:chap 2. http://history.amedd.army.mil/booksdocs/HistoryofUSArmyMSC/
chapter2.html. Accessed February 5, 2015. 9. 
 
9. Ford JH. Field operations. In: Lynch C, ed. The Medical Department in the World War. Section VIII. Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office; 1925:838. 
 10. Pruitt BA. Combat casualty care and surgical progress. Ann Surg. 2006;243(6):715–729.
 11. Donald D, ed. The Complete Encyclopedia of World Aircraft. New York, NY: Barnes & Noble; 1997.
 12. Nanney JS. Army Air Forces Medical Services in World War II. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1998: 15. 
https://archive.org/details/a433168-nsia. Accessed August 30, 2018.
 13. Conner R. Medevac from Luzon. Air and Space Magazine. 2010;25(2):62-67.
 14. Zimmerman DJ. Battlefield medicine in the Korean War. Defense Media Network. http://www.defensemedianetwork.
com/stories/battlefield-medicine-in-the-korean-war. Published February 9, 2014. Accessed February 5, 2015.
 15. Blumen I. A safety review and risk assessment in air medical transport. In: Air Medical Physician Handbook. 1st ed. Salt 
Lake City, UT: Air Medical Physician Association; 2002: supplement. 
 16. Air Medical Services: Critical Component of Modern Healthcare Systems. Alexandria, VA: MedEvac Foundation International; 2011:5. http://aams.org/publications/air-medical-services-critical-component-modern-healthcare-systems-2011/. 
Accessed July 17, 2018.
 17. Mabry RL, Holcomb JB, Baker AM, et al. United States Army Rangers in Somalia: an analysis of combat casualties on 
an urban battlefield. J Trauma. 2000;49(3):515–529.
 18. Gerhardt RT, Berry JA, Blackbourne LH. An analysis of life saving interventions performed by out of hospital combat 
medical personnel. J Trauma. 2011;71(1):S109–S113.
 19. Beekley AC. United States military surgical response to modern large-scale conflicts: the ongoing evolution of a trauma 
system. Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86(3):689–709.
 20. Mabry RL, Apodaca A, Penrod J. Impact of critical care-trained flight paramedics on casualty survival during helicopter 
evaluation in the current war in Afghanistan. J Trauma. 2012;73(2 Suppl 1):S32–37.
619
Casualty Transport and Evacuation
 21. US Department of Defense. Intratheater Transfer and Transport of Level II and III Critical Care Trauma Patients. Joint Theater Trauma System Clinical Practice Guideline, CPG ID: 27. Original release December 18, 2004; update November 
19, 2008. 
 22. Franco YE, DeLorenzo RA, Salyer SW. Emergent interfacility evacuation of critical care patients in combat. Air Med 
J. 2012:31(4):185–188.
 23. Bilski TR, Baker BC, Grove JR, et al. Battlefield casualties treated at Camp Rhino, Afghanistan: lessons learned. J 
Trauma. 2003;54:814–821.
 24. Zoroya G. MEDEVACs for troops to get faster in Afghanistan. USA Today. December 17, 2009. http://truthfortroops.
blogspot.com/2009/12/medevacs-for-troops-get-faster-in.html. Accessed February 5, 2015.
 25. Berry J, Thomas E. A war within. Newsweek. September 20, 2010. Vol. 56, No. 12.
 26. Kotwal RS, Butler FK, Edgar EP, Shackelford SA, Bennett DR, Bailey JA. Saving lives on the battlefield: A Joint 
Trauma System review of pre-hospital trauma care in the CJOA-A. Final report. US Central Command Pre-Hospital 
Trauma Care Assessment Team. http://www.specialoperationsmedicine.org/documents/TCCC_2016/06%20TCCC%20
Reference%20Documents/CENTCOM%20Prehospital%20Final%20Report%20130130.pdf. Published January 30, 2013. 
Accessed July 18, 2018.
 27. Bricknell MCM, Johnson AG. Forward medical evacuation. https://military-medicine.com/article/3083-forward-medicalevacuation.html. Updated July 4, 2013. Accessed February 5, 2015.
 28. Clarke JE, Davis PR. Medical Evacuation and triage of combat casualties in Helmand Province, Afghanistan: October 
2010–April 2011. Mil Med. 2012;177(11):1261–1266. 
 29. Department of the Air Force. Aeromedical Evacuation Operations Procedures. Washington, DC: USAF; 2014. Air Force 
Instruction 11-2AE, Volume 3. 
 30. Beninati W, Meyer MT, Carter TE. The critical care air transport program. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(7suppl):S370–376.
 31. Costa JE. The Casualty Care Interface Between the Air Force Medical Service and Air Force Special Operations Forces [research 
paper]. Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air Command and Staff College, Air University; 2002.
 32. Air Force special operations. In: Hughey MJ. Operational Medicine [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: Department of the 
Navy, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery; 2001. http://webapp1.dlib.indiana.edu/virtual_disk_library/index.cgi/4931363/
FID2617/DATA/operationalmed/special%20operations/air%20force%20pararescue%20forces.htm. Accessed February 
5, 2015.
 33. Department of the Air Force. USAF Medical Support of Special Operations Forces. Washington, DC: USAF; 2012. Air Force 
Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures 3-42. 6.
 34. McKenna P. AFSOC team helps shape future of afghan medicine. Hurlburt Warrior. October 28, 2011;5(43):2–4.
 35. Griego N. Special tactics medical professionals provide critical care and evaluation. Military News blog. http://militaryonline.blogspot.com/2014/02/special-tactics-medical-professionals.html. Published January 9, 2014. Accessed February 
5, 2015.
 36. Iddins BO. AFSOC component surgeon’s report. J Spec Oper Med. 2010;10(3):67–68.
 37. Hartenstein I. Medical evacuation policies in NATO: Allied Joint Doctrine for Medical Evacuation. https://
stopthemedevacmadness.files.wordpress.com/2012/02/nato-medical-evacuation-policies-in-nato-mp-hfm-157-01.pdf. 
Published 2008. Accessed July 19, 2018.
 38. Chang HT. The Battle of Fallujah: Lessons learned on military operations on urbanized terrain (MOUT) in the 21st 
century. J Undergrad Res [University of Rochester]. 2007;6(1):31–38.
620
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 39. Blackbourne LH, Baer DG, Eastridge BJ, et al. military medical revolution: prehospital combat casualty care. J Trauma 
Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(6):S372–S377.
 40. Pepe PE, Copass MK, Fowler RL, Racht EM. Medical direction of emergency medical systems. In: Cone DC, O’Connor 
RE, Fowler RL, Hauda MD, Deatley C, eds. Emergency Medical Systems Clinical Practice and Systems Oversight. Vol 2. 
Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt Publishing and National Association of EMS Physicians; 2009:22–52.
 41. Rotondo MF, Cribari C, Smith RS, eds. Resources for the Optimal Care of the Injured Patient. Chicago, IL: American College of Surgeons; 2014.
 42. Judge T, Thomas SH, Haneky DG. Air medical services. In: Cone DC, O’Connor RE, Fowler RL, Hauda MD, Deatley 
C, eds. Emergency Medical Systems Clinical Practice and Systems Oversight. Vol 2. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt Publishing 
and National Association of EMS Physicians; 2009:253–270.
 43. Apodaca AN, Morrison JJ, Spott MA, et al. Improvements in the hemodynamic stability of combat casualties during 
en route care. Shock. 2013;40(1):5–10.
 44. Lundy JB, Swift CB, McFarland CC, Mahoney P, Perkins RM, Holcomb JB. A descriptive analysis of patients admitted 
to the intensive care unit of the 10th Combat Support Hospital deployed in Ibn Sina, Baghdad, Iraq, from October 19, 
2005, to October 19, 2006. J Intensive Care Med. 2010;25(3):156–162.
 45. Eastridge BJ, Mabry RL, Seguin P, et al. Death on the battlefield (2001-2011): Implications for the future of combat 
casualty care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(6 Suppl 5):S431–437.
 46. Dismounted Complex Blast Injury: Report of the Army Dismounted Complex Blast Injury Task Force. Fort Sam Houston, TX: Office of the Army Surgeon General; 2011:44–47.
 47. Gerhardt RT, De Lorenzo RA, Oliver J, et al. Out of hospital combat casualty care in the current war in Iraq. Ann Emerg 
Med. 2009;53(2):169–174.
 48. Eastridge BJ, Mabry RL, Blackbourne LH, Butler FK. We don’t know what we don’t know: prehospital data in combat 
casualty care. US Army Med Dep J. 2011;Apr-Jun:11–14.
 49. Mears G. Data A-Z. In: Cone DC, O’Connor RE, Fowler RL, Hauda MD, Deatley C, eds. Emergency Medical Systems 
Clinical Practice and Systems Oversight. Vol 3. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt Publishing and National Association of EMS 
Physicians; 2009:29–41.
 50. Kotwal RS, Montgomery HR, Kotwal BM, et al. Eliminating preventable death on the battlefield. Arch Surg. 
2011;146(12):1350–1358.
