1
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
Section I
MILITARY LEADERSHIP, SCIENCE, 
AND ETHICS 
Section Editors: 
Melissa Givens, MD, MPH, and Shawn F. Kane, MD
“White Coat Ceremony,” fall 2018, for the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences F. Edward Hebert School 
of Medicine, in which the class of 2022 is symbolically awarded their white coats while in the uniform of their respective 
service—Army, Navy, Air Force, or Public Health Service—to signify their admission into the profession of medicine while 
serving as a professional uniformed officer. Photograph by Tom Balfour, Bio-Medical Photographer (Lead), Multimedia 
Design Division, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.
2
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
3
The History of the Military Medical Officer
Chapter 1
THE HISTORY OF THE MILITARY 
MEDICAL OFFICER
DALE C. SMITH, PhD*
INTRODUCTION
EMERGENCE OF THE ROLE OF OFFICER
MILITARY PHYSICIANS BEFORE BECOMING OFFICERS
The American Revolution
Military Medicine in the Early 19th Century
THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR: MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICERS IN COMMAND
THE MODERN MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
The War With Spain
The Great War
The Second World War and the Emergence of Medical Specialization
CONCLUSION
*Professor of Military Medicine & History, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
4
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
is, one pertaining to performance of a duty or the 
responsibilities of a post held (an office) on behalf of 
others. Therefore, this chapter will briefly trace the 
history of the officer, then the emergence of military 
medicine as a professional medical activity, and 
finally the combination of the two in the modern 
military medical officer. 
The military medical officer is the person who 
most often practices the Fundamentals of Military 
Medicine and so the presumptive primary reader of 
this book. However, military medical practice antedates the role of military medical officer because 
the role of officer originated outside the concerns of 
the military or medicine—it is an official role, that 
EMERGENCE OF THE ROLE OF OFFICER
service at sea, Admiral John Byng was dispatched, in 
1756, to relieve the Mediterranean island of Minorca, 
which was under threat of French capture. Byng noted 
he had inadequate forces but was not reinforced. 
When he arrived he failed to relieve the island, 
already largely in French hands, and withdrew, in 
accordance with the Sailing Instructions, to the British 
base at Gibraltar. The following year he was tried by 
court martial and found guilty of “failing to do his 
utmost”; he was then shot in keeping with the 12th 
Article of War. Although nearly continual debate on 
the rightness of the execution has occurred since, it 
set a standard for officer behavior. An officer was one 
who could be trusted to do their utmost to meet the 
mission. The import of Byng’s experience was fully 
appreciated by Voltaire, who in his satire Candide has 
an English admiral executed, and the phrase pour encourager les autres—to encourage the others—became 
part of modern motivational rationales. 2 In the early 
American revolutionary military, it was the Byng 
court martial standard of officership that motivated 
The Oxford English Dictionary reports the word officer 
entered the English language from Old French in the 
14th century. Two hundred years later, the word was 
applied to first the Royal Navy and then, in the 17th 
century, to Royal Army personnel holding the king’s 
commission, that is, those performing a duty in a post 
held on behalf of the sovereign. 1 It is not surprising that 
the association of officership with the navy antedates 
its association with the army because the navy operated outside the immediate control of the sovereign; 
therefore, the concept of duty or mission on behalf of 
the sovereign had to be reinforced for the captain (ie, 
leader) of a band of the king’s troops at sea in a way 
it did not for the captain of a band of troops ashore 
(under direct control of the king and his court officials). 
Formal guidance on duties was given in official documents, the Articles of War for all officers and the Sailing 
Instructions for officers of the Royal Navy. 
However, these documents provided guidance 
only, as illustrated by the experience of the naval officer John Byng. After 40 years of highly successful 
TABLE 1-1
EARLY MILITARY SERVICE ACADEMIES*
Country 
Date 
Name
United Kingdom 
1720 
Royal Military Academy Woolwich
France 
1748 
Ecole du Corps Royal du Génie
Norway 
1750 
Krigsskolen
France 
1751 
Ecole Royale Militaire
Austria 
1751 
Theresianische Militärakdemie
United Kingdom 
1801 
Royal Military College, Sandhurst
Prussia 
1801 
Akademie für junge Offiziere der Infanterie und Kavallerie
United States 
1802 
US Military Academy
*The early academies taught a special skill, the use of artillery, because aristocrats could not be presumed to know such a technical job. 
The advantages of specific military education led to general precommissioning academies and then to more advanced schools. But the 
responsibilities of officers changed dramatically over the course of their careers: leading a group of men so small an officer knew them all 
by name and could see them when deployed was different from developing plans for a large group on behalf of a senior officer, which 
was different still from being the senior officer in command of a group numbering thousands. As the services became increasingly larger 
and technical, the tasks an officer needed to perform changed, and the services began to develop education for the next set of jobs at staff 
and war colleges. Military professional education thus differs from other types of professional education, being learned in smaller doses 
throughout a career rather than all in the beginning. 
5
The History of the Military Medical Officer
John Paul Jones to reply with the inspirational “I have 
not yet begun to fight” and Nathan Hale to regret that 
he had “but one life to give for my country.”
The differences in naval and land force officership 
were further highlighted by the educational systems 
that underpinned their practice. A military ship was 
the most complex technology in existence in the early 
modern world. It was to be conserved if it all possible, 
the structure even more than the crew. To be trusted 
with this social investment meant having proved under 
a competent eye that an individual had mastered the 
job. The means to this end was called “the school of 
the ship,” a hands-on apprenticeship in ship handling 
under various real-world conditions. After certain 
skills were learned, the midshipman would stand an 
examination for lieutenant. Time in grade and demonstration of practical knowledge and skill allowed 
promotion to higher rank, and thus to the initial trust 
was added the characteristics of ability to perform the 
mission and faithfulness in meeting the mission. 
In armies, which spent most of their time in garrison, it was more efficient to bring all cadets together in 
a school to provide initial training, so national service 
academies developed for army officer education (Table 
1-1). Civilian professions were crystalizing in the same 
era, but none of them aspired to the same level of social 
responsibility. Although in the last century various 
commentators have considered the military a profession (see Chapter 3, Officership and the Profession of 
Arms in the 21st Century), it retains a unique unlimited 
obligation to accomplish its mission. Consequently, the 
military physician, by becoming an officer, adds to all 
other professional responsibilities a commitment to the 
larger society to fulfill the mission regardless of cost. 3
MILITARY PHYSICIANS BEFORE BECOMING OFFICERS
Now, at that time I was very inexperienced because 
I had not yet seen the treatment of wounds made by 
the arquebus; it is true that I had read in the first book 
of Jean de Vigo about wounds in general, chapter 8, 
that wounds made by firearms are poisoned because 
of the powder and for their cure he commands that 
they be cauterized with oil of elderberry to which a 
little treacle should be added. Not to fail in the use 
of this burning oil and knowing that such treatment 
could be extremely painful for the wounded, I wanted to know before I used it how the other surgeons 
carried out the first dressing; this they did by applying the said oil as nearly boiling as possible to the 
wounds using tents and setons so I plucked up courage to do likewise. At last I ran out of oil and was 
constrained to apply a digestive made of egg yolk, oil 
of roses and turpentine. That night I could not sleep 
easily thinking that by the default in cautery I would 
find the wounded to whom I had failed to apply the 
said oil dead of poisoning; and this made me get up 
at first light to visit them. Beyond my hopes I found 
those on whom I had put the digestive dressing feeling little pain from their wounds which were not 
swollen or inflamed, and having spent quite a restful 
night. But the others, to whom the said oil had been 
applied, I found fevered, with great pain and swelling around their wounds. From then I resolved never 
again so cruelly to burn poor men wounded with arquebus shot. 4(p358) 
Paré, and the community of military surgeons of 
which he was a member, were recognized as valuable 
by the state. As the minister who governed 16th century 
France, Cardinal Richelieu, noted: “two thousand men 
leaving a hospital cured and in some sense broken into 
the profession were far more valuable than even six 
thousand new recruits.”5 As a result of Paré’s work, the 
French crown decided to establish military hospitals 
The care of soldiers by a system of healthcare providers assigned to the military for that purpose dates 
to the Roman Empire and probably to the Egyptian 
armies of the Middle Kingdom (1700 bce). There are 
elements of modern military medicine in various stories of healthcare associated with European armies of 
the late medieval and Renaissance periods. Arguably 
the best-known military surgeon of the 16th century 
was the great French surgeon Ambroise Paré. Paré 
is famous in medical circles for his care of gunshot 
wound patients without the use of boiling oil, the reintroduction of ligature for arterial bleeding, and setting 
a high standard for care of soldiers (Figure 1-1). Paré 
told the following story in his memoirs of the events 
he encountered as a young surgeon: 
Figure 1-1. Ambroise Paré. Colored line engraving by C. 
Manigaud after E.J.C. Hamman. 
Image courtesy of the Wellcome Library, London, England. 
6
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
along the frontiers of the kingdom to provide care for 
wounded soldiers and to train military surgeons to 
provide such care.
The 17th century saw the spread and general 
recognition of the value of patient care provided by 
military medicine to the emerging standing armies of 
the era. Physicians outside the military commented 
on the diseases of soldiers and sailors in studying 
occupational relationships in disease etiology. The 
most famous is probably Bernardino Ramazzini, who 
published De Morbis Artificum Diatriba (Diseases of 
Workers) in 1700. In the mid-18th century several 
practitioners became committed to military preventive medicine in one form or another. Perhaps most 
significant, certainly recognized as exceptional in its 
ideas by contemporaries, was the 1752 work of Dr 
John Pringle (Figure 1-2), Observations on the Diseases 
of the Army in Camp and Garrison, which defined the 
nature of medical advice for the commander in the 
field and garrison for future generations. 6 Pringle 
summarized his purpose in the preface to his Observations as:
My chief intention here, was to collect materials for 
tracing the more evident causes of military distempers, in order that whatever depended upon those 
in command, and was consistent with the Service, 
might be fairly stated, so as to suggest proper measures either for preventing, or for lessening such 
causes in any future campaign. 6(ppvi-vii)
At the same time, James Lind (Figure 1-3) illustrated the importance of preventive medicine issues 
for medical personnel in the Royal Navy through 
his classic work on scurvy, as well as his subsequent, less well known treatises on tropical medicine 
and infectious disease. In 1757 Lind published an 
underappreciated classic, An Essay on the Most Effectual Means of Preserving the Health of Seamen in the 
Royal Navy, in which he advocated command responsibility for the health of sailors. 7 Lind discussed the 
value of military medicine in the Navy as follows:
To a crew replete in health, what enterprise too dangerous? What achievement too great? Whereas, a 
sickly ship’s company, impotent and dispirited, have 
frustrated many a well-concerted expedition, and 
Figure 1-2. Engraving of Sir John Pringle
Image courtesy of the National Library of Medicine, Images 
from the History of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland. Reproduced from: http://resource.nlm.nih.gov/101426740.
Figure 1-3. Portrait of James Lind, 1716-1794, physician at 
Haslar Hospital. Engraving by G. Chalmers after I. Wright. 
Image courtesy of the Wellcome Library, London, England. 
7
The History of the Military Medical Officer
that bravery, which the enemies of our country have 
not been able to vanquish, has fallen a sacrifice to the 
cruel ravage of devouring disease. 7(ppxii-xiii) 
These works departed from the medical discussion 
of diseases associated with military life and argued for 
command of health, a military action or series of actions taken by the commander on advice of the doctor. 
The American Revolution
In the United States, the commitment of excellent 
practitioners to the military needs of the nation predates the nation itself. American military medicine 
began in the armies of the Revolutionary War with 
pre-war militia surgeons and other volunteers who 
supported medical efforts. In the last third of the 18th 
century, military medicine was not highly regarded by 
most line officers. This was due, in large measure, to 
the absence of precision in the advice and treatment 
offered. There was also a social uncertainty about the 
role of an essentially middle class profession in what 
was traditionally an aristocratically led organization. 
The British traditions, accepted as patterns for the early 
revolutionary armies, placed surgeons in military units 
for the care of the injured and ill. 
At the regimental level there was a hospital, medically managed by the senior surgeon with the aid of 
other surgeons and enlisted personnel detailed by line 
units. The detailed enlisted staff had no particular skill 
or training for the duties and were most often troops 
the line commander could best do without—the misfits and malcontents. The regimental hospital seldom 
cared for large numbers of patients except right after 
battle. In garrison there were expected to be general 
hospitals, staffed by the superior command, to relieve 
the regimental hospital during epidemics and to take 
members of the regiment too ill to deploy when the 
regiment left garrison. The American militia regiments 
understood, at least in theory, their need for surgeons 
and regimental hospitals, but when the war began no 
larger organization existed to provide general hospitals 
and the medical supplies necessary to keep the regimental hospitals functional over the course of the campaign.
Congress acknowledged the need for a larger medical organization to support the forces and in 1775 created the “Hospital,” headed by Dr Benjamin Church 
of Boston. As director general, Church was responsible 
for the Hospital Department, which included general 
hospitals, wherever and whenever established, as well 
as the surgeons recruited to work in the general hospitals. The Hospital Department was responsible for the 
acquisition and stockpiling of medical stores to meet 
the army’s needs. The nature of Church’s responsibility for and control over regimental surgeons was not 
specified. They continued to work for the colonel of 
the regiment and to draw supplies from the Hospital 
Department. They left wounded soldiers at general 
hospitals when the regiment moved, but frequently 
they did not cooperate with the general hospitals in 
staffing and patient distribution issues. The lack of a 
system, even in law or regulation, was in keeping with 
the humanitarian focus of military medical practice in 
the Hospital Department.
When the Revolutionary War began, leaders of 
American medicine produced guides and other works 
for the benefit of both practitioners of medicine and 
line officers in the new army. Perhaps most impressive 
was the little book of Benjamin Rush, published in 1778, 
which provided, according to its title, Directions for 
Preserving the Health of Soldiers Recommended to . . . the 
Officers of the United States Army. Rush was emerging 
as a leader in the medical profession of Philadelphia 
at the time. He was a member of the medical faculty 
of the College of Philadelphia (later the University 
of Pennsylvania) and, perhaps more importantly, a 
patriot of distinction. A delegate to the Continental 
Congress, he was one of the five physician signers of 
the Declaration of Independence in 1776. Rush’s advice 
in Directions was based in large measure on the work of 
Pringle and dealt with environmental issues as well as 
factors of personal hygiene, food, and clothing. What 
is striking is the recognition both in the title and the 
contents of the work that responsibility for the health 
of the force rested in the actions of the line officer 
rather than the medical practitioner. Doctors could 
and should provide good advice; the officers would 
have to implement it for it to be effective. 
Command attention to medicine was a growing 
enterprise in the 18th century generally, and in the 
first regulations of the Continental Line (the formal 
name for the congressionally supported military in the 
Revolution), Regulations for the Order and Discipline of 
the Troops of the United States, prepared by Major General Baron von Steuben (Figure 1-4), inspector general 
of the army, specific direction was given for efforts to 
maintain health. These included careful placement of 
the kitchen and sinks, daily inspection of the tents by a 
company officer, and the appointment of an “officer of 
police” to inspect the camp. 8 The Regulations also discussed responsibilities of the regimental commander:
The preservation of the soldier’s health should be his 
first and greatest care; and as that depends in great 
measure on their cleanliness and manner of living, 
he must have a watchful eye over the officers of companies, that they pay the necessary attention to their 
men in those respects. 8(p128)
8
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
While the regulations appeared in 1779, they were 
written contemporaneously with and probably inspired Rush’s Directions for Preserving the Health of 
Soldiers in 1778 (adoption of the Regulations by Congress and printing by government contract slowed 
their appearance). 
Among the physicians serving in the revolutionary army and aboard naval ships, most were simply 
doing the best they could in a difficult situation. At 
the operational level, they were most often excluded 
from discussions of military events; thus, placement 
of hospitals was rarely a carefully conceived plan and 
was almost always dictated by space available near 
the point of need. Patriots in the field, true “minute 
men” who happened to be physicians, they did not 
consider themselves and no one considered them 
military officers, but these early military physicians 
started and supported a tradition that military medical officers have maintained: “the preservation of the 
soldier’s health should be [the] . . . first and greatest 
care. . . .”8(p67)
Military Medicine in the Early 19th Century
At the turn of the century, while the young United 
States was closing down its standing army and medical 
establishment, European states were transforming the 
art based on the necessity of a new kind of war—the 
wars of the French Revolution—with its larger, levee en 
mass armies and, under Napoleon, a new and vigorous 
use of combined arms warfare. 
By the end of the 18th century, both the practicalities 
of recruiting and retention and the moral philosophy of 
the Enlightenment had advanced the idea that troops 
were entitled to care in the field, and almost all armies 
in Europe had an organized medical service. When, 
in 1792, European countries decided that the French 
Revolution had gone too far and invaded to restore the 
kingdom, the members of the previous French Royal 
Army felt conflicted: did they stand with France or 
with the crown? Many stood with France, including 
a military surgeon named Pierre-François Percy, who 
was assigned as chief surgeon for the Army of the 
North. Percy recognized that surgeons assigned to 
Figure 1-4. (a) Painting of Major General Friedrich Wilhelm 
Augustus Baron von Steuben by Ralph Earl, 18th-century.
Image courtesy of Yale University Art Collection. Reproduced 
from Wikimedia Commons. (b) Steuben FWA. Regulations 
for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United States. 
Philadelphia, PA: Styner and Cist; 1779. Reproduced from: 
https://www.loc.gov/resource/rbc0001. 2006batch30726/?sp=8. 
a
b
9
The History of the Military Medical Officer
individual units would become ineffective as the larger 
armies of the Republic took more casualties than previous, smaller royal armies. He developed new medical 
vehicles to take surgeons forward and advocated for a 
new type of medical soldier, the brancardier, or dedicated litter bearer, who would work for the surgeon 
in the field. Napoleon named Percy surgeon-in-chief 
of the Grande Armee and authorized the expanded 
recruitment and training of litter bearers in the early 
19th century. Percy was also an early advocate of 
rank-immaterial, medically dictated triage. But Percy, 
with his common sense administrative suggestions, 
is frequently forgotten because of the success of his 
younger colleague, Dominic Jean Larrey (Figure 1-5).
Internationally the most famous military surgeon 
who ever lived, Larrey is generally credited with 
systematically and intentionally moving the surgeon 
forward on the battlefield to care for the wounded as 
early as possible. He achieved this goal by creating a 
surgical unit, the “flying ambulance,” which included 
a group of operating teams, field evacuation personnel, 
and evacuation vehicles under his consolidated guidance as surgeon to the Guard, Napoleon’s elite field 
unit. Larrey conceived the idea of the flying ambulance 
in 1794, when he saw the flying artillery rushing across 
the battlefield at Mainz. He designed a small wagon on 
an artillery carriage and, with an assistant and some 
non-medically trained aides, he took himself forward 
to aid the wounded in Italy later that year. Larrey was 
made a baron of the French Empire and a commander 
in the Legion of Honor, but his military rank remained 
surgeon major (major in the French army is the highest 
warrant rank; an O-4 is a commandant). Percy and Larrey achieved innovations because their ideas enjoyed 
line support from commanders who believed they had 
an obligation to care for their troops, but they might 
have been more effective if considered officers and allowed to know the commander’s plan before the battle. 
In the United States, Congress appointed physicians 
to the forces, whether regiment, hospital, or ship; they 
did not hold military rank, could not give orders, and 
were not entitled to the privileges and courtesies due 
officers. On the other hand, they were not soldiers or 
sailors, nor were they civilians, as the first court martial 
established. Physicians were professionals and thus 
the social equal of many officers in the egalitarian culture of the new nation; however, traditions inherited 
from Europe drew a sharp distinction between the 
aristocratic classes, who led the fight, and those who 
supported them in the effort (Exhibit 1-1). The medical 
system in the War of 1812 was essentially that which 
had been developed in the Revolution and disbanded 
in the intervening years. In 1817, Surgeon Joseph Lovell 
called the attention of the commanding general of the 
Northern Division, Jacob Brown, to the defects of the 
medical establishment in a comprehensive and innovative report of inspection. 9 
Following the War of 1812, Congress reorganized 
both the Army and the Navy but in quite different ways. 
In 1816, John C. Calhoun began his tenure as secretary of 
war with the goal of providing the Army in peacetime 
the structure it would need in war. He selected Major 
General Jacob Brown as his senior military advisor, and 
Brown, in turn, brought Lovell’s ideas to the attention 
of the secretary. In 1818, Calhoun convinced Congress 
of the value of establishing a permanent Army Medical 
Department (AMEDD) and a permanent position, the 
surgeon general of the Army, at its head. Joseph Lovell 
was appointed as the first surgeon general.
The Navy was reorganized with three senior line 
captains serving as commissioners to advise the secretary of war, but the secretaries of the next decade 
were primarily interested in cost containment. Officer 
education, on the British model, was still the school of 
the ship, with midshipmen learning while serving indefinite tenures until they could pass the examination 
Figure 1-5. Dominic Jean Larrey, a copy of Porträt des Barons 
Larrey, Erster Chirurg des Feldzuges nach Ägypten by Anne-Louis 
Girodet-Trioson, 1804. 
Reproduced from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:AnneLouis_Girodet-Trioson_005.jpg. Source: The Yorck Project, 
2002. 
10
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 1-1
SURGEON HEERMANN AND OPERATIONAL MEDICINE
The utility of medical officers and the problems of their ambiguous status were demonstrated in squadron deployments against the pirates of the Barbary Coast in the first decade of the 19th century. In 1801, an observation squadron 
was sent to the Mediterranean, and in 1803 one of its frigates, the Philadelphia, ran aground and was captured by the 
naval forces of Tripoli. Commodore Edward Preble authorized the ship’s destruction to deny it to the enemy. Stephen 
Decatur, at that time a lieutenant commanding the Enterprise, was given the task of leading a volunteer raid into the 
harbor to burn the vessel. He was given the captured ketch Intrepid to infiltrate the harbor. Decatur asked his surgeon, 
Lewis Heermann, to assist in screening the volunteers, for he wanted no one subject to sudden indisposition among 
the personnel on this dangerous mission. He further informed Heermann that the surgeon would accompany the 
expedition until the ketch was about to enter the harbor, and then he would be put aboard the brig Siren for safety. 
Heermann requested that Decatur reconsider his decision with a tripartite argument that captured the essential features 
of military medicine and rings through the operational traditions of navy medicine to this very day: “My life, Sir, is 
not more valuable than that of the other brave officers and men who accompany you;. . . . the presence of a professional man to assist the wounded might save many valuable lives, . . . and will not sailors more regardlessly expose 
themselves, when they know that professional aid is near at hand? Should you have many wounded, would not some 
confusion arise, to impair your effective force?”1 The appeal to humanitarianism and the importance of morale were 
important to Decatur, as they are to any officer, but given the mission and what is known of Stephen Decatur, it must 
have been the operational thinking that carried the day—the doctor went along.
1. Pleadwell F. Lewis Heermann. Ann Med Hist. 1923;5:113–145.
for lieutenancy. Navy medicine would not enjoy a 
centralized system for another generation. In 1828, 
the naval committees in Congress were finally asked 
to reorganize naval medicine. The position of surgeon’s mate was abolished, as was direct commission 
of surgeons. Under the new law, physicians were 
recruited and took an examination to be appointed as 
an assistant surgeon. After 5 years and successful passage of another examination, they were, by seniority, 
promoted to surgeon when a billet became available. 
The Navy examination system of 1828 was the first 
recognition that all military physicians needed certifiable 
dual competency. The examination of all candidates for 
entry was medical, serving as an acknowledgment that 
standards in the young nation’s medical schools had 
declined in the previous generation. To assure the sailors, and their families and friends, that the nation would 
adequately care for those who served, a board of senior 
medical officers examined the medical competency of 
all who were appointed. The examination for the grade 
of surgeon included not only medical knowledge but 
specific naval material on diseases at sea, examination 
of recruits, and the hygiene of ships. Surgeon Thomas 
Harris began a course of instruction at the Philadelphia 
Navy Yard for assistant surgeons on shore duty, in the 
hope of preparing them for their promotion examination. 
In the Army, Joseph Lovell’s reform efforts were directed along several lines simultaneously. Significantly, 
he had to fight to establish control over the department 
in the face of congressional attempts at detailed management. Congress initially specified a wide variety of 
duties for Army surgeons, each with a different title and 
rate of compensation. These included hospital surgeons, 
hospital surgeon’s mates, post surgeons, and regimental 
surgeons and surgeon’s mates, as well as the apothecary 
general and his assistants. In 1821, Congress gave up 
attempts to specify the composition of the department 
in detail and created a two-tier system, of surgeons 
and assistant surgeons, who the surgeon general (with 
the consent of the secretary of war) could assign as he 
wished. Like the contemporary naval model, this created a hierarchical system, parallel to the commissioned 
officer grades. Medical officers were not awarded commissions, but the AMEDD gained a large element of 
control to respond to changing needs. 
Lovell was perpetually concerned about the caliber 
of practitioners in the service. He believed, and the testimony of physicians of the era supports his belief, that 
the low pay of military physicians militated strongly 
against retention of the best practitioners. In 1832 
Lovell instituted, on the Navy model, a mandatory 
examination of all those desiring to join the AMEDD. 
The examination lasted 3 days and was conducted by 
a board of three experienced officers; it covered basic 
science as well as clinical skills and included both 
written and oral formats. After 5 years of service, an 
assistant surgeon was obliged to take an examination 
for promotion to surgeon. In 1834 the pay of surgeons 
was tied to that of majors in the line; that of assistant 
surgeons of 5 years’ service to captains; and that of 
new assistant surgeons to the pay of lieutenants. This 
pay structure gave military medical officers relative 
11
The History of the Military Medical Officer
rank; they ranked as lieutenants, captains, and majors, 
but they were not called lieutenant, captain, or major, 
and they could not perform the ancillary professional 
duties of a commissioned officer, such as sitting on a 
board of inquiry, nor could they issue a legally binding 
order to a soldier. 
In 1842 a system of six bureaus was adopted to improve the functioning of the Navy in support of ships 
at sea. One of the bureaus was the Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery, and like the others it had a chief who 
reported to the secretary of the Navy. The title of surgeon general was consciously not used in 1842 (it was 
introduced after the Civil War) because it implied more 
control and authority over the surgeons than the bureau 
system envisioned (Navy medicine still did not have 
a system). In August 1846, the secretary of the Navy, 
George Bancroft, ordered assimilated or relative rank. 
The surgeons were specifically denied the authority to 
exercise command, even in hospitals, because Bancroft 
felt that authority required approval of law. 
The reason for Bancroft’s action is straightforward: he was trying to improve the effectiveness of 
ship’s surgeons in war. American ships blockading 
Mexico were frequently pulled from the line because 
a large portion of their crews had scurvy. British 
and French naval observers chastised the American 
Navy for this preventive medicine failure; in their 
view scurvy was a completely preventable disease. 
However, even when surgeons offered what to them 
were straightforward solutions, line implementation 
did not always follow. Fortunately, the blockade was 
short. In the years that followed the Mexican War, the 
secretary of the Navy gave the chief of the medical 
bureau additional authorities. Especially important 
to the status of medical officers was the creation of a 
technical chain of command and reporting established 
in 1848. Now the surgeon’s reports would go to the 
bureau and the ship’s commanding officer could not 
interfere; this was not authority, but it provided real 
persuasive power. 
Figure 1-6. Florence Nightingale checking on her patients and administrating medicine at Scutari Hospital. Colored lithograph by J.A. Benwell. 
Image courtesy of the Wellcome Library, London, England. 
12
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
In February 1847, Congress passed legislation giving medical officers in the Army true commissions 
and real as opposed to assimilated rank, in part 
trying to improve the effectiveness of medical operations in the field. However, the law was not clear on 
what the new commissions meant. In both services 
the war had demonstrated that disease was at least 
as great an enemy as the opposing forces, and there 
was an increased desire to do something about it. 
The British army was severely condemned for lack 
of preparation and preventive medicine efforts in the 
mid-1850s when it went to war in Crimea (1853–1856). 
Conditions were so bad that private philanthropy 
organized by The Times newspaper sent a civilian 
EXHIBIT 1-2 
THE RED CROSS AND THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS
The Christian tradition in Europe has included several attempts at limiting the application of the “just war” doctrine to 
those engaged in the fighting. Some consider the Knights Hospitaller, who operated infirmaries and escorted pilgrims 
in the 12th and 13th centuries as a means to protect noncombatants, as the origin of the ideal, but their history is unclear 
at critical points. In the 16th century various legal scholars argued for the immunity of noncombatants. In 1625 Hugo 
Grotius published his influential De jure belli ac pacis libri tres (On the Law of War and Peace: Three Books), which argued 
for strict laws on going to war and conducting wars. Certainly by the 17th century there were also attempts in both 
Protestant and Catholic nations’ laws of war to protect churches, schools, and hospitals. The first mutually agreedupon protection of hospitals is probably that between British and French military commanders at Aschaffenburg in 
the War of Austrian Succession (1740–1748). 
But as war became more industrial and armies composed of more eclectic personnel, humane efforts were harder to 
preserve. A particularly vicious battle in the Second Italian War for Independence, the Battle of Solferino, was witnessed by a Swiss businessman, Henri Dunant, who wrote up his recollections of the experience in an effort to gain 
international cooperation to improve the conditions of those caught up in war. Friends in Switzerland helped form 
an international relief committee in 1863, now named the International Committee of the Red Cross. The Red Cross 
recognized national committees that various nation states agreed to charter and support. 
Many of the signatories to the Red Cross idea met again the next year and adopted the Geneva Convention for the 
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field. The limited first Geneva convention provided four protections: (1) immunity from capture and destruction of all establishments for the treatment of 
wounded and sick soldiers; (2) impartial reception and treatment of all combatants; (3) protection of civilians providing aid to the wounded; and (4) recognition of Red Cross symbol as a means of identifying persons and equipment 
covered by the agreement.
At the time, the United States was in the midst of the Civil War and President Lincoln, fearing European involvement 
in the suppression of the rebellion, did not send a voting representative. Lincoln did send a team of two observers, and 
subsequently he issued General Order 100, which provided many of the same protections. In 1882, the United States 
ratified the Geneva Convention and the following year established a Red Cross society, largely due to a campaign led 
by Clara Barton. 
Further treaties followed as war changed. The Hague Convention of 1899 applied the protections of 1864 to war at sea, 
and in 1906 a second Geneva Convention combined the 1864 and 1899 efforts. There were conventions about weapons 
in 1907 and 1925, motivated primarily by gas warfare, and in 1929 the treaties were expanded to include protections 
for prisoners of war. After the Second World War the treaties were again modified to reflect the changing conditions 
of war and expanded in an effort to protect civilian noncombatants while recognizing partisans as troops. Permanent 
Red Cross staff and the signatory nations to the Geneva Conventions continued to struggle with the concept of humane war as wars of national liberation, both nationalistic anti-colonial efforts and communist-inspired insurgencies, 
proliferated in the last half of the 20th century.
In the war trials following the surrender of Japan in World War II, the United States made the argument that nations 
and their military officers were bound by commonly agreed-upon international law, even if they did not sign the new 
treaties. Some signatory states of the 1949 Geneva convention have adopted further protocols in the 1970s and early 
21st century, but the United States has not agreed to all of these provisions (see Chapter 6, The Law of Armed Conflict 
and Military Medicine). 
Data source: Gillespie G. A History of the Laws of War: Volume 1, The Customs and Laws of War with Regards to Combatants and Captives. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Hart Publishing; 2011.
13
The History of the Military Medical Officer
with official blessing, Florence Nightingale (Figure 
1-6), to help in the troop hospitals. Supported by 
William Russell’s dispatches from the theater via 
the telegraph (the first nearly real-time reporting), 
Nightingale’s work came to international attention. 
Eventually her efforts helped shape an educated 
nursing community, inspired hospital reform, and 
most importantly, reinforced the well-understood but 
often ignored command obligation for the health of 
the soldier and sailor.
In 1859 Henri Dunant, a traveling Swiss businessman, came across the aftermath of the Battle of Solferino; his description of the experience is one of the 
classics of humanitarian action on fields of battle, Un 
Souvenir de Solferino, published at his own expense in 
1862. It led to a series of meetings in Geneva, which 
resulted in the International Committee of the Red 
Cross and a proposed international treaty, called 
the Geneva Convention, to provide for the care of 
soldiers and make military medical facilities immune 
(theoretically off limits to enemy attack) (Exhibit 1-2). 
Clearly, in the mid-19th century the public showed 
an increasing concern with the health and care of 
those who served.
Figure 1-7. Major Jonathan Letterman as medical director of 
the Army of the Potomac. 
Image courtesy of the National Library of Medicine, Images 
from the History of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland. Reproduced from: http://resource.nlm.nih.gov/101421695.
THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR: MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICERS IN COMMAND
The lack of a traditional aristocracy and the creation of an education-based officer corps from the 
US Military Academy underpinned the American 
innovation of true commissions for Army Medical 
Corps officers. At various times in the 1850s, the 
adjutant general, the president, and the Congress 
made clear the command authority of doctors was 
restricted to the medical arena, but these directives 
were enough to fulfill the aspirations of generations 
of physicians on the battlefield who wished for a 
medical system. In keeping with the humanitarianism of the age, American officers on both sides of 
the Civil War understood troop health and care was 
their responsibility. 
The US Army sent a team of officers to serve as observers in Crimea. There Richard Delafield, the team’s 
chair, lent his name to a commission and its widely 
read report. The American public also heard much 
about Crimea and Florence Nightingale through the 
civilian press. Consequently, the Army made many 
important innovations: various forward hospital and 
ambulance modifications; significant involvement 
of nongovernment organizations, especially the US 
Sanitary Commission; research and education work 
on the part of the Office of the Surgeon General; and 
an exceptionally vigorous program of hospital building, all capitalizing on previous ideas and efforts. 
However, in the history of the military medical officer, these achievements paled in comparison to the 
impact of the work of Jonathan Letterman, medical 
director of the Army of the Potomac from 1862 to 
1864 (Figure 1-7).
After the first battle of Manassas Junction, President 
Lincoln named Major General George McClellan, one 
of the Delafield commissioners, as commander of the 
Army of the Potomac. McClellan decided to attack 
the Confederate capital by way of the James River 
peninsula, but the campaign was not well thought out, 
and logistics, including medical supply and evacuation, were a disaster. Spring and early summer were 
a time of sickness, and disease rates exceeded battle 
casualties, further complicating the medical support. 
Major Charles Tripler, the medical director at the time 
and one of the most experienced operational medicine 
experts in the Army, was unable to systematically 
bring medical supplies in or patients out of the area 
of operations. Not surprisingly, he lost the support of 
his seniors, both medical and line, and was replaced 
by Major Letterman, who was given license to change 
the current system. 
14
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
One of Letterman’s first observations was that 
the problem of patient evacuation was seriously 
compounded by the failure of teamsters, contracted 
by the quartermaster to evacuate the field of battle, 
to perform the job. A new approach was needed. In 
July 1862, McClellan approved a dedicated (used 
only for medical purposes) ambulance corps for the 
Army of the Potomac. Enlisted personnel would be 
trained to handle litters and move patients under 
the military chain of command, a noncommissioned 
officer in the regiments and a company grade officer 
at brigade, division, and corps levels, and Letterman 
would command the entire organization. Thus began 
actual command of regular troops in the field by the 
medical officer, albeit to perform a medical task; this 
was the job civilian doctors, or those under warrant, 
could not do. 
In the original Army of the Potomac units with ambulance corps, the new system worked very well, but 
the battle of Antietam revealed other problems related 
to patient evacuation and medical supply. After the 
battle, as noted by both the press and Major Letterman, 
patients were stacked up in some hospitals while others were underused; there were flexible standards of 
care leading to amputations; and critical medical materials were in short supply. These problems pointed 
to the following changes proposed by Letterman: The 
medical director should have command of all field 
hospitals in the deployed force, and hospitals should be 
located at the division level rather than the traditional 
regimental location. Regimental aid posts should be 
established in conjunction with the ambulance system 
to facilitate sorting the patients for their move to the 
hospital. Operating teams needed to be preselected 
based on skill and experience rather than desire and 
rank, and there should be mandatory consultation on 
all amputation decisions. A medical officer should be 
designated to coordinate further evacuation from the 
field hospitals and medically appropriate transport 
arranged to move the wounded back to the general 
hospitals being built in Washington, Baltimore, and 
Philadelphia. Finally, medical supplies needed to be 
controlled centrally and pushed forward as needed 
rather than stored forward and subject to unnecessary 
wastage. Major General Ambrose Burnside, selected 
by President Lincoln to command the army after McClellan was relieved, approved all of Letterman’s suggestions, and a medically commanded field medical 
system came into existence for the first time. 
The new system worked brilliantly at Fredericksburg in December 1863, even though Burnside and the 
Army lost the battle. Encamped before Fredericksburg 
that winter, the troops had begun to sicken. In discussions with the regimental medical officers, Letterman 
discovered that their diet was inadequate and living 
conditions were unsanitary. He took the problem to 
the new commander, Major General Joseph Hooker, 
who undertook corrective action and authorized Letterman to establish a formal medical inspectorate to 
assure the health of the army. The resulting Letterman 
system was complete: from prevention to echeloned 
care, the military medical officer had a set of new roles 
and responsibilities in the deployed force, roles that 
could be met only by those with military authority. 
Equally important, the system had been sanctioned 
by three commanding generals. In 1864, Letterman’s 
system became required by law in all US field armies 
for the duration of the war. 
However, when the war ended in 1865, these measures disappeared from American practice. But the 
system did not vanish. European powers had sent observers to US battlefields, and the US Army published 
its medical experiences in the multi-volume Medical 
and Surgical History of the War of the Rebellion,10 which 
was widely read and studied in Europe. The Prussian 
army used Letterman’s system effectively in the wars 
of German unification, and the French and British 
adopted parts of it in conjunction with other military 
medical reforms in the last quarter of the century. All 
the European armies were using it in World War I, and 
the AMEDD relearned it from the allies as the United 
States entered the war in 1917.
THE MODERN MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER
When Florence Nightingale returned to London 
after the Crimean War, she realized some of the diseases seen in the Near East were not seen (or taught) 
in England, and military physicians needed enhanced 
education to serve wherever their duties took them. 
She called for a military medical school to provide 
the extra education civilian doctors recruited into 
the service would need, and in 1860 the British Army 
Medical School was established. At the same time a 
similar course of instruction was offered at the Val 
de Grace Hospital in Paris for deploying French military physicians. Such a school was first proposed by 
Surgeon General Hammond for the American army 
during the Civil War, but it was not established until 
1893, by Surgeon General Sternberg. 
By the 1890s all these schools were teaching microbiology of camp and tropical diseases, and military 
medical officers became among the best educated 
physicians. The new epidemiology (and other sciences) 
would eventually make medical advice predictable 
15
The History of the Military Medical Officer
and consistent, but it took time for the officer corps 
to recognize this change. The schools also taught the 
growing body of military professional material that 
medical officers needed to understand, especially their 
unique place in the emerging international laws of war 
and their functions as staff advisors.
Military staff work had evolved slowly since the 
early modern period, but the nature of industrial 
war accelerated its growth and definition. Largely as 
a result of the extraordinary Prussian success in the 
wars of German unification (1866–1871), senior line 
officers in Europe and the United States were exploring 
advanced professional military education and its role 
in the creation of staff officers. At Annapolis a debate 
arose over the role of engineering officers in the new 
steam navy, and the reformation of the concept of a 
naval line officer to include at least junior engineers. 
A sharp distinction was set between officers of the line 
and officers of the staff in 1871 legislation; the Navy 
doctor, as an officer of the staff with relative rank, 
gained authority to command in medical facilities in 
the 1880s; and actual as opposed to relative rank was 
finally awarded to naval surgeons in 1899. 11 In the 
Army, the School of Application for Infantry and Cavalry was created in 1881 at Ft Leavenworth, patterned 
after the artillery school at Ft Monroe, to teach young 
officers to more effectively use their units. 
The War With Spain
Unfortunately, these medical and military education 
efforts did not pay the dividends expected in the next 
US war. In part this was the result of the 18th-century 
approach to militia mobilization still in use in 1898. 
The medical departments and the combat arms units 
needed to recruit volunteers, and the volunteers, 
physicians and line officers, were not well informed 
about modern military applications, medical science, 
or prevention in the field. In the Spanish-American 
War, Surgeon General Sternberg sent out a circular on 
Figure 1-8. (a) Edward L. Munson as a brigadier general at 
the end of World War I. (b) Title page of Munson’s classic 
text on the line officer use of medical assets, The Principles of 
Sanitary Tactics, 1911.
Image (a) courtesy of the National Library of Medicine, 
Images from the History of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland. 
Reproduced from: http://resource.nlm.nih.gov/101424082. 
Image (b) reproduced from Internet Archive: https://archive.
org/details/principlessanit00munsgoog.
a
b
16
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
prevention of fecal-oral transmission of typhoid, concluding there should be no typhoid in the Army camps. 
Therefore, the surgeons did not diagnosis patients as 
having typhoid, instead describing the patients as having typhomalaria or some other disease. Sternberg was 
therefore surprised when the newspapers reported an 
epidemic of typhoid in the training camps. The second 
problem was similar: line officers had heard about 
germs but did not really believe something they could 
not see would make the men sick, and therefore they 
paid very little attention to advice from the doctors on 
the relative positioning of latrines and water sources. 
More Americans died of typhoid fever in US training 
camps than were killed by the Spanish. 
After the war, a presidential commission to study 
the work of the Army in the war, led by retired Brigadier General Granville Dodge and so called the Dodge 
Commission, concluded that the AMEDD needed a 
reserve of doctors to call during deployments because 
civilian physicians, while patriotic and willing, were 
not prepared to meet the mission. The Dodge Commission also concluded that line officers needed AMEDD 
education in care of troops during peacetime professional military education to make sure they understood 
the importance of the medical advice given during 
deployments. 
Departments of hygiene were established at the 
US Military Academy and US Naval Academy, and 
surgeons assigned to the relatively new Naval War 
College began to offer lectures on the subject, but 
the most impressive program was at the Army’s 
School of Application in Leavenworth, Kansas. Soon 
renamed the Staff College, the school’s Department 
of the Care of Troops became the home of Major 
Edward L. Munson (Figure 1-8), who worked with 
the line instructional staff to teach line officers about 
medical readiness and to teach medical officers how 
to work on a division staff. Recognizing the need to 
speak to military leaders in terms they understood, 
Munson called his instruction “sanitary tactics.” He 
also developed summer encampments for reserve and 
National Guard medical units to help them prepare 
for deployed medicine. 
Figure 1-9. (a) Paul F. Straub as a major on the War College 
staff. (b) Title page of Straub’s classic text for medical officers, 
Medical Service in Campaign, 1910.
Image (a) courtesy of the National Library of Medicine, 
Images from the History of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland. 
Reproduced from: http://resource.nlm.nih.gov/101421695. 
Image (b) reproduced from Internet Archive: https://archive.
org/details/medicalservicei01stragoog.
a
b
17
The History of the Military Medical Officer
Additionally, the Army Medical School in Washington, DC, reopened in 1901 and started a program 
of summer encampments for future regular medical 
officers. The 1909 encampment gave rise to an important professional manual, Medical Service in Campaign: 
A Handbook for Medical Officers in the Field,12 by Major 
Paul Straub, a Medal of Honor awardee in the Philippine Campaign who was assigned part time to the 
War College planning staff (Figure 1-9). Between them, 
Munson and Straub defined the US Army special staff 
role for military medical officers and for line officers 
as part of the new military staff function. As officers 
trained to understand the military units, roles, and 
missions, the new members of the medical corps were 
better prepared to give advice that, in Pringle’s classic 
phrase, “was consistent with the Service.”
The same scientific progress that improved preventive medicine advice also changed therapeutic 
medicine and led to the involvement of more personnel in the healthcare enterprise. In the second half of 
the 19th century, the hospital became an increasingly 
common site of care as a result of industrial trauma, 
urbanization, and the changes in care dictated by the 
new medical sciences of physiology and microbiology. 
Military medicine had long used hospitals for custodial 
care of soldiers and sailors without family to care for 
them, and even this use of hospitals increased. 
However, the issue of staffing was by no means 
clear. The new trained nurse served the civilian community, but the military had a long tradition of enlisted 
hospital stewards and baymen. These enlisted medical 
soldiers and sailors were temporary, but militaries 
around the world made them increasingly dedicated 
in the last quarter of the century. In the United States, 
the Army established the Hospital Corps in 1887, and 
the Navy did so in 1898. The Navy Hospital Corps’ 
was delayed by the problem of recruiting landsmen 
for service at sea without adequate sea service to care 
for themselves in the risky environment. Most medical 
services had used “nurses” at various times in their 
hospitals, especially in fixed hospital facilities, but 
these personnel had various levels of training and 
commitment. 
By the 20th century the new scientific nurse training 
(inspired by Florence Nightingale) was in virtually 
every Western nation, and military hospitals began to 
use educated and registered nurses exclusively. The 
US Army added the Nurse Corps in 1901; the Navy 
followed in 1908. As other professional groups became 
important to military medicine, they were added; 
sometimes, like dentists, as a separate corps, at other 
times, like pharmacists, as part of a preexisting corps. 
Physicians continued to hold the command positions 
because many of these new groups were either civilians on warrants or enlisted. However, like physicians 
before them, many of these professionals campaigned 
for commissioned status on the argument they would 
be more effective as officers.
In addition to new types of personnel, the nature 
of the medical profession was being changed by the 
new sciences, which underpinned a rise in specialized 
practice. Few practitioners limited their practices to a 
specialty, but many were gaining a consultation and 
referral reputation in their locality. Military medical 
services were generally ambivalent about the civilian 
specialization efforts because all military medical officers needed to be able to practice in isolation and be 
fully competent in all aspects of practice. While Army 
doctrine since Letterman had recognized different 
levels of skill, the US Army made no effort to codify 
surgical skill and experience. The US Navy developed 
a post, supervising surgeon, in its larger hospitals, with 
the duty to encourage and supervise the education and 
training of junior officers in the surgical arts. 
The Great War
In European services the long tradition of separate 
communities of physicians and surgeons easily allowed recruitment of surgical consultants to hospitals 
from civil life in times of need, especially during largescale mobilizations. In the United States, however, 
as the Army prepared for war in 1916, there was no 
obvious solution to assure recruitment of medical staff 
with the required skills. The surgeon general, William 
Gorgas, was familiar with the academic preventive 
medicine community, and although he had less personal knowledge of expertise in American surgery, he 
knew those who did.
Leaders in American medicine had created the Physicians’ Committee on Preparedness in 1916 to mobilize 
the medical profession for the possibility of war. William J. Mayo was its chair. The committee encouraged 
physicians to enroll in the reserve corps and polled 
county medical societies to build lists of physicians 
with specialized skills. General Gorgas asked Dr Mayo 
to come onto active duty and report to the Office of the 
Surgeon General as his advisor on surgical personnel; 
unfortunately, the laws on the assignment of officers 
prevented such an advisory or consulting appointment. The 1916 legislation that created a new reserve 
component also limited reservists to commissions as a 
major. For credibility with allied medical departments 
and as a sign of professional stature, leading physicians 
in the reserve corps thought they should be colonels. 
Dr William Mayo and his brother, Dr Charles Mayo, 
worked in their civilian capacity to get these laws 
changed, and consequently Major William Mayo was 
18
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
able to report to the Office of the Surgeon General for 
assignment as a newly promoted colonel. 
Colonel Mayo, in conjunction with other leaders in 
American surgery, worked out a system of assigning 
surgeons from the reserve to deployed hospitals while 
preserving surgical skill to support the civilian population and wartime industries in the United States. The 
practical need to be a colonel to get things done in 
Washington and the importance of parity with allied 
officers was readily conceded by combatant arms officers. However, the creation of instant reserve corps 
medical colonels, when a colonelcy took almost 20 
years to earn in the regular service, line or medical, in 
addition to the direct commission of medical specialists 
as field grade officers, led to some resentment among 
regular officers. In the 15 years following World War 
I, both the Army and the Navy resisted the use of 
specialization in regular medical corps officers. Both 
services expected the specialized medical expertise to 
be found in the reserve corps and actively encouraged 
academic medicine’s participation in the reserves, 
where the abbreviated route to promotion and direct 
commissions at field grade would be less offensive.
In Europe during World War I, medical officers 
worked with both enlisted personnel and nurses in 
an intense operational environment. Nurses were 
deployed forward in mobile hospitals and staging 
facilities despite their ambivalent status as civilians 
recruited by the Red Cross and attached to the Army. 
Following a French example, to reduce the time before 
point-of-wounding care was initiated, first the Marines 
and later the Army deployed enlisted personnel from 
ambulance units forward on temporary duty with the 
combatant units. As a result, World War I was the last 
war in which a medical officer, Lieutenant Joel Boone, 
US Navy Medical Corps, was awarded the Medal of 
Honor, and the first war for a Navy corpsman to receive the medal. 
Because there were many more enlisted medical 
personnel than medical officers, and they could be 
trained in first aid to do almost as much as a physician 
in the field, the future use of forward medics became 
a policy norm. Assuring their training and role in a 
coordinated field care environment became a critical 
new function of medical officers. The war also witnessed the temporary creation of a new class of medical 
department officers, the administrative and sanitary 
corps, consisting of non-physicians with needed skills 
to contribute in critical areas that did not absolutely 
require physician participation, such as administration, epidemiology, and logistics. These corps were 
disbanded after the war, re-created in World War II, 
and consolidated in the post-World War II period as 
the Medical Service Corps. 
Regular medical officers were largely responsible 
for command and control of the medical system in 
the theater of operations during the World War I 
European deployment. Examples of excellence and 
innovation included Colonel Gilchrest’s deployment 
of gas decontamination units13 and Colonel Lyster’s 
development of aviation medical support units. 14 
However, Major General Merritt Ireland, medical officer of the American Expeditionary Forces (and after 
1918 the surgeon general), thought the overall level 
of coordination and communication was subpar and 
needed to be improved. Because field medicine was the 
traditional essential competence of the medical officer, 
Ireland established the Medical Field Service School in 
1921 to teach basic field skills to new Medical Corps 
officers. The school also provided a training center for 
medical units that allowed more experienced officers 
the opportunity to practice skills of command, control, 
coordination, and communication in a predeployment 
situation. 
The Second World War and the Emergence of 
Medical Specialization
During World War II the military medical officer 
role was similar to that of World War I: the regulars 
provided command and control while the reserves 
provided specialists, especially consultants. The vast 
majority of medical personnel served as providers 
and had minimum military training, mostly common 
field skills so they could take care of themselves when 
deployed. These physicians were officers by courtesy 
and, although they held military authority, their de 
facto authority was medical in the medical setting. 
A change, mostly for generalists, was an increasing 
number of officers assigned to support the aviation 
arms of both services. 
The other significant change in World War II was 
more difficult for the services and their medical departments to accommodate. The war had proven the 
absolutely essential nature of specialists as part of 
the regular AMEDD. After the war all three services 
established graduate medical education programs that 
initially depended on the civilian academic community for educators and accreditation; however, these 
programs slowly developed expertise of their own 
as officers went through the process and matured as 
specialists. 
But career patterns developed for general practitioners were not always adaptable to medical specialist 
practitioners. In a medical department of general 
practitioners, all officers were available for all duties 
commensurate with their rank and years of service, 
but the new medical departments of the late 1940s had 
19
The History of the Military Medical Officer
to adapt to medical officers with narrower interests. If 
an officer with 1 year of postgraduate education spent 
6 to 8 years with the active forces and was assigned 
as a division surgeon, he would know something of 
preventive medicine and field hospital utilization 
for surgical medical and psychiatric patients. But the 
new specialist major, who had spent 5 of those years 
in a teaching hospital as a surgical resident, could not 
be expected to do the same job effectively. The difficulties of providing professional military education 
and experience during graduate medical education 
would be made fatally obvious during combat on the 
Korean peninsula, when young officers without field 
experience were ineffective in command of battalion 
medical units.
Postwar tensions evolved into the so-called Cold 
War that turned into combat action in Korea in 1950. 
Because insufficient physician volunteers were available, a doctor draft was instituted, which continued 
until 1973 (when an all-volunteer force policy was 
initiated). During the doctor draft all healthy male physicians completing internship were subject to a 2-year 
service obligation. The obligation could be deferred 
for residency, but the cost was an increase in obligation. Only about 4% of obligated physicians stayed in 
the service, and a peculiar force structure developed 
(a surplus of O-3s and a dearth of senior O-4s and 
O-5s). In an effort to retain more physicians, a separate 
promotion board was established in 1960 to promote 
Medical Corps officers separately from other officers. 
Higher promotion rates and faster promotion resulted, 
and retention was slightly improved. However, a perceived lack of rigorous military standards for medical 
officer promotions damaged the credibility of medical 
officers among other members of the officer corps. 
Drafted doctors, who received only abbreviated 
professional military education before being sent to 
Korea, and then in the 1960s to Vietnam, reinforced 
the general perception of their inadequate leadership 
and professional military skills. In Korea several battalion aid stations were lost to the enemy because of 
failures in common field skills and leadership on the 
part of inadequately prepared battalion surgeons. 
Vietnam witnessed the Levy case, in which a drafted 
doctor refused to train medics for the Special Forces 
because (1) he thought they would misuse their medical knowledge (a violation of his medical ethics) and 
(2) the war was immoral and probably illegal, so the 
order to train them was not legal, and he should be 
excused by the Nuremburg precedent that one did 
not need to obey illegal orders. 15 (Levy was convicted 
under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, and his 
conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court on appeal; see Chapter 5, Military Law and Ethics.) 
The negative perception of medical officers was 
furthered by the conduct of many field grade specialty 
providers in hospitals in the United States who failed 
to get appropriate haircuts and wore the uniform improperly, compromising good order and discipline. 
These problems declined with the discontinuation of 
the doctor draft, but some force structure problems 
persisted because of the rapid promotion of medical 
officers who did not have commensurate military 
experience. Frequently the physician was the second 
most senior officer in the battalion or on the cruiser, 
and not all specialty training was particularly adaptable to deployed settings. Additionally, professional 
military education for Medical Corps officers remained 
an administrative struggle because the medical service 
benefit for uniformed and then retired service members grew steadily after its introduction in 1956, and 
physicians were needed to provide care in peacetime.
The need for providers, especially specialty providers, made gaining professional military education and 
subsequent staff and command experiences at a junior 
level increasingly difficult for military medical officers. 
At the end of the Persian Gulf War, the Army surgeon 
general introduced a requirement thought radical by 
most of the AMEDD: that to be considered for the rank 
of colonel, a physician would need to successfully 
complete the Officer Advanced Course, a requirement 
for promotion to captain in the 1950s. The course, since 
renamed the Captains Career Course, is now mostly 
online with little required on-site instruction. 
CONCLUSION
The military needs physicians to succeed as officers, 
and there is some evidence that the public and soldiers 
want physicians to be in charge of medical areas. There 
is a strong belief that physicians naturally take patient 
care questions into consideration in making command 
decisions. However, being a good, or even great, physician will not make someone a good commander; only 
good officers can command successfully. By the end of 
the 20th century, the need for officers to command had 
given rise to corps-immaterial command opportunities 
in medical units. While medical service and nurse officers have done exceptional jobs in command roles, the 
21st century has seen a resurgence of Medical Corps 
command opportunities as military medical officers 
make the conscious decision to prepare themselves 
for command by pursuit of professional military education (often online) and seek appropriate positions 
earlier in their careers. To help combat service support 
20
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
as well as National Guard and reserve officers, the 
Staff College, renamed Intermediate Level Education, 
is available at various sites as well as online. Learning 
to be effective on a staff still requires knowing what is 
“consistent with the Service.” 
Medical officers should attend Intermediate Level 
Education in their second medical utilization tour. 
They will find they know the medicine, and while all 
providers are constantly struggling to stay current, 
the provider with 4 or 5 years of practical experience 
is no longer concerned that their medical skills are 
inadequate. Also, at that point it is easiest to take a 
couple years out of the 60-hour-a-week clinic and 
serve on a staff or in a command preparation position. Consultants and specialty leaders are available to 
help with career planning. Good officership, like good 
medicine, is a deliberate choice and requires more than 
meeting a minimum requirement; in the words of the 
Byng court martial, it requires the commitment to “do 
your utmost.” 
REFERENCES
 
1. Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press; 1971: sv “officer.”
 
2. Royal Naval Museum. Information sheet: John Byng. http://www.royalnavalmuseum.org/info_sheets_john_byng.htm. 
Accessed August 15, 2017.
 
3. Hackett JW. The Profession of Arms. London, England: Times Publishing Company; 1962: 63. 
 
4. Paré A. Les oeuvres de M. Ambroise Paré conseiller, et premier chirurgien du Roy avec les figures & portraicts tant de l’Anatomie 
que des instruments de Chirurgie, & de plusieurs Monstres. Paris, France: Gabriel Buon; 1575.
 
5. Internet Archive. Full text of Chirurgiens et blessés à travers l’histoire des origines à la Croix-Rouge. https://archive.
org/stream/chirurgiensetble00caba/chirurgiensetble00caba_djvu.txt. Accessed June 6, 2017.
 
6. Pringle J. Observations on the Diseases of the Army. London, England: A Millar and D Wilson; 1752.
 
7. Lind J. An Essay on the Most Effectual Means of Preserving the Health of Seamen, in the Royal Navy. London, England: D. 
Wilson; 1762. https://archive.org/details/essayonmosteffec00lin. Accessed June 6, 2017.
 
8. Steuben FWA. Regulations for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United States. Philadelphia, PA: Styner and Cist; 
1779.
 
9. Craig SC. “Some System of the Nature Here Proposed”: Joseph Lovell’s Remarks on the Sick Report, Northern Department, U.S. 
Army, 1817, and the Rise of the Modern US Army Medical Department. San Antonio, TX: Borden Institute; 2015.
 10. The Medical and Surgical History of the War of the Rebellion. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1870–1888.
 11. Laws Relating to the Navy, Annotated. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1922.
 12. Straub PF. Medical Service in Campaign: A Handbook for Medical Officers in the Field. Philadelphia, P. Blakiston’s Sons; 
1910. 
 13. Gilchrist HL. A Comparative Study of World War Casualties From Gas and Other Weapons. Edgewood Arsenal, MD: Chemical Warfare School; 1928.
 13. Ireland MW. Medical Aspects of Gas Warfare. Vol XIV in: The Medical Department of the United States Army in the World 
War. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1926.
 14. US War Department, Air Service, Division of Military Aeronautics. Air Service Medical. Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office; 1919.
 15. Parker v Levy, 417 US 733 (1974). https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/417/733/case.html. Accessed June 6, 2017.
