457
Approach to the Emergency Patient
Chapter 32
APPROACH TO THE EMERGENCY 
PATIENT
TRESS GOODWIN, MD*; KATHERINE ELLIS, MD†; and CRAIG GOOLSBY, MD, MEd‡
INTRODUCTION
WHY EMERGENCY MEDICINE IS DIFFERENT
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
Prehospital Arrivals
The Initial Assessment
Sick Versus “Not Sick”
The Safety Net
The Emergency Department Workup
PATIENT ISSUES AND CHALLENGES SPECIFIC TO THE EMERGENCY 
DEPARTMENT
CHALLENGES IN DEPLOYED EMERGENCY MEDICINE
SPECIFIC CHIEF COMPLAINTS AND RED FLAGS
Abdominal Pain
Chest Pain
Headache
Trauma
Shock
Poisoning
Cardiac Arrest
Case-Based Approach Summary
DISPOSITION
SUMMARY
*Assistant Professor, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland; 
Attending Physician, Children’s National Health System, Washington, DC 
†Major, Medical Corps, US Air Force; Medical Director, Malcolm Grow Medical Clinic Emergent Care Center, Joint Base Andrews, Maryland
‡Associate Professor and Vice Chair, Education, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
458
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Military medical providers (MMPs) face numerous 
challenges in both stateside and deployed medical 
practice. One of the most daunting and time-sensitive 
challenges is managing a patient with an acute lifethreatening illness or injury. Patients with anaphylaxis, 
severe hemorrhage, unstable cardiac dysrhythmias, 
or intractable seizures need the right care, right away. 
Many practitioners do not encounter these types of 
patients in their normal practice, and therefore lack 
a conceptual framework and organized approach to 
handle an unexpected emergency. Regardless of their 
medical background, a practitioner can apply fundamental concepts that will benefit patients in these types 
of high-pressure situations. For students and providers 
of all levels, this chapter will provide the approach of 
a specialty-trained emergency physician (EP) to the 
fundamentals of assessing and treating severely ill 
and injured patients. 1
This chapter will introduce readers to the concepts 
of simultaneous diagnosis and treatment, working 
with imperfect or limited information, and operating 
in resource-constrained environments. This approach 
is critically important to the MMP who confronts the 
challenges of a deployed environment with limited 
access to specialty consultants, including EPs. The 
chapter also touches on a variety of core emergency 
patient presentations. While it is not intended to be 
a definitive clinical reference, it will inform readers 
about “red flags” and key features of assessing and 
managing these patients.
Beyond the normal challenges of civilian emergency 
medical practice, in which patients are primarily treated 
in designated emergency departments (EDs), military 
practitioners may find themselves in hostile locations 
with scarce resources. Mental preparation for emergency practice in these settings is essential for all MMPs. 
WHY EMERGENCY MEDICINE IS DIFFERENT
Emergency medicine is complaint driven. When a 
patient presents to an outpatient orthopedics department, for example, the patient’s issue is often 
focused and within a limited subset of diagnoses, 
such as fractures or joint pain. The same applies to 
many other fields in medicine, where presenting 
problems are often diagnoses rather than symptoms. 
For example, a patient visits their primary care doctor 
for diabetes management, and the goals of the visit 
and expected outcomes are anticipated and often 
predictable. Emergency patients typically present 
with symptoms or a chief complaint. These symptoms 
could represent a benign or life-threatening condition, and the EP must rapidly and efficiently make 
this distinction. Thus, practitioners must shift their 
mindset to “complaint-based” or “symptom-driven” 
evaluations of patients. Not all evaluations will lead 
to a definitive diagnosis, and providers working in 
an emergency setting may end up “diagnosing” their 
patient with “chest pain” or “abdominal pain” after 
having excluded life-threatening conditions during 
their workup process. 2 
Emergency patients are often scared. There have been 
numerous poorly informed popular media reports 
about patients using EDs for non-urgent issues and 
EDs primarily serving the uninsured. However, multiple studies have shown that nonacute issues do not 
constitute the majority of ED visits, and that many 
ED users are indeed insured and have a primary 
care provider. 3–6 When a patient presents to the ED, 
they are concerned enough about their symptoms 
to seek emergency care, and their complaints are 
often high risk. Emergency patients often believe 
their symptoms are life threatening or warrant immediate evaluation. An emergency practitioner must 
recognize and acknowledge this worry. Sometimes 
patients only need reassurance and education, and 
then they can be safely discharged to their home or 
returned to duty. It is important to remember that 
even patients with benign conditions require respect 
and a thorough evaluation of their complaint by an 
experienced provider. 
EPs have unique doctor-patient relationships. EPs 
face the need to form an immediate rapport with 
patients, with whom they have no prior patientdoctor relationships, in a high-stress environment. 
The EP must rapidly earn the patient’s trust so he 
or she will feel comfortable disclosing personal 
details. In a deployed setting, EPs also care for 
unique populations, such as local nationals and 
enemy prisoners of war, which makes establishing 
rapid rapport and an effective treatment relationship even more complex.
EPs operate in an environment of uncertainty. Test 
results are often not available in time to make crucial 
treatment information. Patients can arrive obtunded 
and unable to provide a history. EPs often cannot follow up with patients after discharge. These are just a 
few examples of uncertainty emergency providers will 
face. These situations can be uncomfortable, but mental 
preparation for these realities can help non-emergency 
specialists succeed. 
459
Approach to the Emergency Patient
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
Prehospital Arrivals
Few non-EPs interact routinely with prehospital 
providers. Prehospital crews transport most emergently ill or injured patients, whether deployed or 
stateside, for emergency care. In the United States, 
patient transport is done by a combination of 
paramedics and emergency medical technicians in 
ambulances and helicopters. In a deployed setting, 
transport is done by military medics with varying 
skill sets and in a multitude of platforms, such as helicopters, armored vehicles, or vehicles of opportunity. 
Depending on the training and equipment of these 
providers, the arriving patient may already have 
had interventions and diagnostics performed, such 
as venous access, an electrocardiogram, or a blood 
glucose measurement. Most often, the prehospital 
providers will call and report to the EP, allowing 
the ED to prepare for the patient’s arrival. For example, if an urgent surgical patient is inbound, the 
EP can prepare and gather all necessary equipment, 
have blood prepared to transfuse, and summon any 
needed help or consultants prior to the patient’s arrival. Preparation is even more important in mass 
casualty events when a large number of patients 
arrive at the same time.
The Initial Assessment
MMPs caring for emergency patients should hone 
their ability to perform a “doorway assessment” for 
a quick evaluation of the patient’s condition. Simple 
observations by a well-trained eye are crucial to gathering information and starting rapid treatment. Here 
are questions to consider when evaluating a patient 
on arrival: 
 
• Did the patient arrive via ambulance or come 
into the waiting room?
 
• Did the patient walk into the room or arrive 
via wheelchair or stretcher?
 
• Does the patient walk without assistance? 
With a steady gait?
 
• What is the patient doing? Writhing in pain? 
Lying motionless? Talking on a cell phone?
 
• What is the patient’s work of breathing? Are 
they gasping for air, wheezing, or breathing 
comfortably?
 
• What is the patient’s level of pain? Are they 
holding a particular area, grimacing, or moaning?
 
• Is the patient actively vomiting?
 
• What is the patient’s mental status? Do they 
acknowledge you walking in the room and 
make appropriate eye contact, or is their 
mental status altered?
 
• Is the patient morbidly obese, normal, or cachectic? 
 
• What about the skin: does the patient appear 
pale, mottled, cyanotic, jaundiced, burned, or 
covered in a rash? Do you see hemodialysis 
access in their arm?
 
• What is the patient’s hygiene? Clean? Disheveled? Neglected?
 
• What does the room smell like? Alcohol? 
Gangrene? 
 
• Is family, battle buddy, or a caretaker at the 
bedside, or did the patient arrive alone?
All the above questions, and many more, can be 
answered in seconds. Practitioners should be mindful 
of all available information when seeing emergently ill 
or injured patients. This review, combined with vital 
signs, and very brief historical information can yield 
important information needed to begin an emergency 
assessment and stabilization. 
Sick Versus “Not Sick”
EPs use the term “sick” to refer to seriously ill or 
injured patients. While the vast majority of ED patients 
have some degree of illness or injury, most will not 
be critically ill. Determining “sick” from “not sick” 
sounds simple, but is in reality a challenging skill that 
must be developed by anyone providing emergency 
care. Some patients’ situations are fairly obvious—in 
clear respiratory distress, unconscious, or with hemorrhaging wounds. These conditions should be immediately stabilized. The more challenging patients 
are the ones who are not overtly sick, but have characteristics that make them high risk and more likely 
to decompensate.
A blunt trauma patient (eg, someone who had a 
fall) can initially appear well with no significant overt 
signs of trauma, a fairly benign exam, and stable 
vitals. However, they may decompensate as internal 
injuries, such as a lacerated spleen, worsen. Knowing that this patient has a high-risk history should 
prompt the emergency practitioner to continue to 
monitor and reevaluate the patient (see below for 
a list of key chief complaints and tips for spotting 
“sick” patients).
460
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
The Safety Net
EPs use the term “safety net” in one of two ways. A 
civilian ED is the safety net of the medical community. 
An ED is the only medical facility open 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year. When a patient’s 
primary care physician’s office is closed, or if they do 
not have a primary care doctor or are visiting from 
out of town, the emergency room may be the only 
option. The ED may be the only option for the uninsured, under-insured, homeless, and mentally ill. In a 
policy statement, the American College of Emergency 
Physicians wrote: 
Having the only universal mandate for providing 
health care—the Emergency Medical Treatment 
and Labor Act (EMTALA)—the nation’s more than 
4,000 hospital emergency departments are a portal 
for as many of three out of four uninsured patients 
admitted to US hospitals, making them a vital, 
although often unrecognized, component of the 
safety net. 3
The safety net concept also refers to an initial 
series of steps designed to stabilize patients. Once 
a sick patient is identified, emergency providers 
must rapidly establish the safety net. While most 
emergency patients will not rapidly decompensate 
during their initial ED course, sick patients might. A 
mantra often cited by medics and EPs alike is, “IV, 
O2, monitor, advanced airway equipment.” These 
procedures—establishing intravenous (IV) access, 
placing the patient on oxygen and a cardiac monitor, 
and ensuring advanced airway equipment is readily 
available at the bedside—are the foundation of the 
safety net. 
The safety net should be started immediately. 
On entering the room of a sick patient, emergency 
providers should order the team to initiate safety 
net procedures while rapidly anticipating next steps. 
Will the patient require fluids (blood or crystalloid)? 
Should antibiotics be started? Does the patient require 
intubation or additional venous or intraosseous access? 
The key to establishing the safety net is preparedness, 
and becoming comfortable starting treatment while 
performing diagnostic studies. An elderly, hypotensive, tachycardic patient with altered mental status is 
sick. If the provider waits for all imaging and lab tests 
to return, the patient may not survive. Additionally, 
a patient may need immediate fluid resuscitation, 
antibiotics, or cardioversion prior to performance of 
any labs or additional diagnostic testing. These rapid 
steps may be uncomfortable for many MMPs but may 
save an emergency patient’s life.
The Emergency Department Workup
The focus of an emergency patient’s workup and 
care is based on the chief complaint. Patients may 
have many ongoing medical issues at a given time 
and present with multiple complaints. However, 
one acute issue typically prompts the ED visit, and it 
should be the focus of the provider’s history, physical exam, and diagnostic testing. As in other areas of 
medicine, patient history and physical examination 
provide most of the needed information to drive any 
necessary testing to diagnose and indicate appropriate disposition the patient.
Unlike in some other areas of medicine, emergency 
providers need to think in a worst first mentality. 
Medical students are typically trained to take a history 
and perform a physical exam, generate a differential 
diagnosis, and then consider which diagnosis is most 
likely. Emergency providers follow these steps as well; 
however, instead of considering which diagnosis is 
most likely, they must consider which is most lethal—
the worst first. As described above, patients presenting 
for emergency care often have emergency problems 
and are at higher risk than those seen in outpatient 
clinics. This does not mean that all patients require 
exhaustive testing to exclude emergency diagnoses; 
rather, it is imperative that an emergency provider 
consider these diagnoses and exclude them by history, 
physical examination, or testing if indicated. 
For example, when a 30-year-old asthmatic patient 
presents to an ED with a chief complaint of “shortness 
of breath,” the diagnosis is most likely an asthma exacerbation. However, a pulmonary embolus is a more 
lethal diagnosis. If the provider does not consider 
and at least mentally address this possibility, he or 
she might miss an important emergency condition. 
Knowing the potentially fatal diagnoses for each 
patient complaint and focusing a workup to exclude 
them are key knowledge and skills for emergency 
providers. 
Again, testing should be focused on the patient’s 
chief complaint. MMPs should consider available resources and choose tests that will change management 
of their patient. An example of a widely available test 
that can rapidly change management is a pregnancy 
test in a woman of childbearing age with an abdominal 
or pelvic complaint. This one simple qualitative answer 
can drastically change the direction of diagnostics and 
treatment. On the other hand, an example of an often 
unnecessary test is a rib x-ray series. For a patient with 
mild chest trauma who is suspected of having either 
a rib fracture or rib contusion, rib x-rays are usually 
not indicated. Rib fractures and contusions are treated 
461
Approach to the Emergency Patient
with the same conservative care; there is no difference 
in the treatment. A chest x-ray may be indicated to 
exclude pneumothorax or another abnormality, but 
identifying specific rib fractures will likely not change 
emergency management or patient disposition or 
follow-up. Management is the same—pain management and prevention of atelectasis or pneumonia with 
incentive spirometry. 
PATIENT ISSUES AND CHALLENGES SPECIFIC TO THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
Most EDs have individual patients who frequently 
use the ED for care. Sometimes derogatorily called 
“frequent fliers,” these patients use the ED repeatedly 
and often for similar presentations. They are usually 
older, have chronic medical conditions such as coronary artery disease or asthma, and can be a source of 
frustration to the staff. Some assume that these patients 
use the ED as their only source of care, but studies have 
shown that they are also likely to utilize outpatient 
clinics and have high rates of hospital admission. 4–6 
As with other patients, the challenge is to know when 
their issues are acute and life threatening. They must 
be evaluated during each encounter with the same 
thoughtful approach as any other patient. Additional 
resources, such as social worker consultations, should 
also be considered to help address other factors of their 
frequent ED utilization.
EPs play a crucial role in detecting signs of abuse 
in patients—ranging from infant/child abuse, to 
intimate partner violence, to elder abuse and neglect. 7 Patients presenting with multiple visits and 
various injuries, along with stories inconsistent with 
injury patterns, should raise suspicion of abuse. In 
addition, concern should be raised if the patient 
seems evasive or inappropriately frightened, or if 
an overbearing and perhaps defensive partner or 
family member is in the room. 8 In children, bruises 
in various stages of healing as well as fractures or 
injuries not consistent with their age or mobility 
should all be red flags for the EP. 9 Often the ED may 
be the only healthcare setting these victims visit, and 
having reasonable suspicion with at-risk patients 
with concerning injuries could be the intervention 
that saves their life. 
CHALLENGES IN DEPLOYED EMERGENCY MEDICINE
Deployed MMPs face additional challenges in the 
operational environment. Depending on the setting, 
personal safety can be a concern. During deployment, 
MMPs are far from loved ones and may have limited 
ability to communicate with them. Additionally, practitioners may be working outside their normal comfort 
zone in their patient care duties. Several challenges for 
emergency providers follow.
Caring for unique populations. MMPs will almost 
certainly care for more than American troops when 
deployed. They may treat contractors, local nationals, 
third-country nationals, enemy prisoners of war, and 
a host of other individuals. Caring for these populations may involve certain rules and unique challenges, 
but the basic principle remains that MMPs provide 
a baseline standard of care to every patient, regardless of background. Department of Defense Directive 
2310. 01E, which covers the Defense detainee program, 
mandates “humane treatment,” which includes “appropriate medical care and attention required by the 
detainee’s condition, to the extent practicable.”10 As in 
caring for diverse patients stateside, this may require 
a language interpreter and adaptation to cultural 
concerns. It is important that each MMP is aware of 
the unique populations in their deployed setting, the 
resources available to help care for these patients, and 
the specific guidelines directing care at each facility.
Mass casualty care. Military emergency providers 
will likely see mass casualties that are more significant 
in scope than those typically seen during stateside 
duty. This book covers mass casualty in a separate 
chapter (Chapter 34, Mass Casualty Preparedness and 
Response), but it is important for emergency providers 
to develop or understand their facility’s contingency 
plan during a mass casualty event.
Resource availability and utilization. The resources 
available will vary dramatically depending upon the 
practice environment. Section II of this book, Operational Health Service Support, covers this topic in 
more detail. The military designates various levels of 
care based on availability of resources, ranging from 
first responder care to large stateside medical treatment facilities. MMPs at a Role 1 setting, such as a 
battalion aid station, do not have the ability to admit 
patients or perform advanced diagnostics. Those at a 
Role 3 facility, such as an Air Force theater hospital, 
will likely have computed tomography (CT) scanners, 
a host of medications, and access to operative care 
with surgical subspecialists. While MMPs should still 
consider tests that would change patient management, 
their options may be significantly different than when 
practicing at home. 
462
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
SPECIFIC CHIEF COMPLAINTS AND RED FLAGS
This section consists of case scenarios focusing on 
several common patient complaints. It is not meant to 
be a complete list of chief complaints seen in the ED; 
rather, it is designed to help MMPs learn the process 
of evaluating a patient from an emergency medicine 
perspective. The scenarios and workups described 
include some repetition, partly because emergency 
medicine providers approach many patients in a 
similar way. As discussed previously, the EP will ask, 
“is the patient sick or not sick?” and then proceed to 
a more thorough history and exam as appropriate. 
For any given complaint, specific “red flags” indicate 
a more serious problem. These flags might be something the patient reports in the history, a physical 
exam finding, a vital sign, a lab result, or an imaging 
study. Some may seem obvious, such as a patient who 
is unconscious, but others are subtler. The scenarios 
that follow also take into account some of the unique 
challenges of military medicine: austere locations, 
limited resources, long transport times, and a diverse 
patient population. 
Abdominal Pain
You are working sick call at a remote forward operating 
base. Your next patient is a 22-year-old female active duty 
soldier with a chief complaint of abdominal pain. Your medical technician provides a set of vital signs: blood pressure 
(BP) 90/60, heart rate (HR) 110, respiratory rate (RR) 18, 
temperature (T) 98°, oxygen saturation (Spo2) 98% on room 
air. You walk into the exam room and see the patient sitting 
on the exam table, awake and alert, and in mild distress 
secondary to pain. In the 10 to 15 minutes that you have 
with the patient, what are your priorities? What important 
questions do you need to ask? What will you look for on 
physical exam? What is the most important test you need 
to order for this patient?
Abdominal pain can be a complex and frustrating 
chief complaint for the EP. A recent study showed 
that 6. 5% of ED patients have abdominal pain as 
their presenting complaint, and of these, 21% were 
not discharged with a specific diagnosis, and were 
instead recorded as having undifferentiated “abdominal pain.”11 A focused history and physical exam can 
narrow the differential diagnosis and quickly identify 
those patients who need further testing. 
Even before the EP sees the patient, her vital signs 
indicate she has tachycardia and borderline hypotension, and is potentially sick. The patient should be 
asked more history about her abdominal pain: When 
did it start? Where is it located? What makes it better 
or worse? Are there associated symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, changes in bowel movements, changes 
in urination, anorexia, or vaginal bleeding? Does she 
have a history of chronic abdominal problems such 
as gastrointestinal reflux, gallstones, or inflammatory 
bowel disease? Has she had prior abdominal surgeries? When was her last menstrual period? 
All women and girls of childbearing age, even in the 
deployed setting, should be assessed for pregnancy. 
A pregnancy test is the most important test to order 
for this patient because the results will direct further 
imaging studies and disposition. A pelvic exam can 
be considered if there is concern for pelvic pathology. 
Abnormal vital signs must be addressed. If the patient 
is dehydrated, she should receive oral (PO) or IV fluids. 
If she is in pain, she may need either PO or IV pain 
medication. Most abdominal pain patients should 
initially be kept NPO (nil per os, or nothing by mouth) 
until a surgical emergency is excluded. 
The patient is initially reluctant to talk to you, but 
eventually confides that her last menstrual period was 6 
weeks ago. Her pain started last night, is located in her right 
lower quadrant, and is steadily worsening. She has also had 
a small amount of vaginal bleeding. On physical exam, she 
is tender in the right lower quadrant with voluntary guarding but no rebound tenderness. Pelvic examination shows 
a closed cervix with a small amount of dark red blood in 
the vaginal vault and right adnexal tenderness. Her urine 
pregnancy test comes back positive. What are your next 
steps in management?
This patient must be worked up for ectopic pregnancy, a potentially life-threatening condition in which 
the fetus implants outside of the uterus, usually in the 
ovarian tube. The patient should be kept NPO. Appropriate labs to consider include complete blood count 
to evaluate for anemia given her history of vaginal 
bleeding, basic metabolic panel, quantitative human 
chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), and blood type and 
screen. She should be started on IV fluids and given 
IV pain medications. A pelvic ultrasound should be 
performed, which can be used not only to identify an 
ectopic pregnancy, but also to evaluate other serious 
causes of abdominal pain such as an ovarian torsion or 
tuboovarian abscess (Exhibit 32-1). A skilled EP may 
be able to perform this test at the bedside. Depending 
on the facility’s resources, ultrasound technicians and 
radiologists may be available to perform and interpret 
the study. 
While waiting for her ultrasound, the patient begins 
to complain of severe pain. Her BP drops to 70/40 and 
her HR increases to 130. She now has guarding and has 
rebound tenderness on her exam. What are your next steps 
in management?
463
Approach to the Emergency Patient
EXHIBIT 32-1
ABDOMINAL PAIN: 
CAN’T-MISS DIAGNOSES 
• perforated ulcer
• cholecystitis
• pancreatitis
• ischemic bowel
• diverticulitis
• appendicitis
• pyelonephritis
• ectopic pregnancy
• ovarian torsion
• testicular torsion
• tuboovarian abscess
• pelvic inflammatory disease
• myocardial infarction
• bowel obstruction
• volvulus
• gastrointestinal bleed
• abdominal aortic aneurysm
This exam is concerning for a ruptured ectopic pregnancy: a surgical emergency. The patient may be losing 
a significant amount of blood into her abdomen. A 
bedside FAST (focused abdominal sonographic study 
for trauma) ultrasound exam can confirm free fluid in 
the abdomen (Figure 32-1). A FAST exam is a rapid, 
bedside test that can be used to evaluate for the presence of free fluid in the abdomen or around the heart 
Figure 32-1. Ultrasound showing ruptured ectopic pregnancy. 
(blood, in the setting of trauma).The patient should be 
aggressively fluid resuscitated with blood products, if 
available, or fluids if not. If the treatment facility has 
the capability, the patient should go to the operating 
room with a gynecologist for surgical repair. If those 
resources are not available, she should be immediately 
transferred to the nearest facility with surgical capability, which may include transfer to a general surgeon 
if a gynecologist is unavailable. 
There are several red flags in this patient’s case. 
The presence of abnormal vital signs, and especially 
worsening vital signs throughout a patient’s visit, 
should warn the EP there might be a life-threatening 
problem. Rebound and guarding on physical exam 
are concerning for a ruptured viscus. In this case, the 
patient had a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. In a different clinical scenario, rebound tenderness may be a sign 
of appendicitis, cholecystitis, diverticulitis, perforated 
peptic ulcer, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, 
or other serious conditions. These patients all need 
prompt surgical consultation. 
Significant lab abnormalities, such as electrolyte 
problems, acidosis, and severe anemia may also 
prompt admission or transfer. Stable abdominal pain 
patients with normal vital signs and reassuring physical examinations, who are able to tolerate PO fluids, 
and with non-concerning labs and imaging studies (as 
indicated), may possibly be safely discharged to quarters or full duty. Discharged patients with abdominal 
pain should have a repeat abdominal exam in 24 to 48 
hours if the pain continues, as well as specific instructions to return sooner for worsening or concerning 
symptoms. These return precautions may include 
worsening pain, persistent vomiting, high fevers, or 
other new concerns. If the patient is unable to follow 
up with their primary care physician, it is reasonable 
to have them return to the ED. 
Chest Pain
You are working in the ED at a deployed Air Force base. 
Your next patient is a 55-year-old obese male contractor 
who presents complaining of chest pain. His vital signs are 
BP 150/80, HR 95, RR 16, T 97°, and Spo2 98% on room 
air. What additional history will help you determine if this 
patient is at high risk for a life-threatening condition? What 
are the top “can’t-miss” chest pain diagnoses? What is the 
most important test you need to order for this patient?
Chest pain accounts for 3% of ED visits and can 
range from common active duty problems such as 
muscle strains, costochondritis, and viral syndromes 
to truly life-threatening etiologies. 12 Six life-threatening 
causes of chest pain a provider should consider in 
every chest pain patient are acute coronary syndrome, 
464
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
pulmonary embolus, aortic dissection, hemothorax, 
pneumothorax, esophageal rupture, and pneumonia 
(Exhibit 32-2). Before any chest pain patient can leave 
the ED, these diagnoses should be ruled out, either by 
history and physical exam or with diagnostic testing. 
The patient should be asked to describe his chest 
pain: when did it start? What does it feel like? What 
makes it better or worse? Are there associated symptoms such as shortness of breath, nausea, diaphoresis, 
or cough? He should be questioned about his risk 
factors for acute coronary syndrome, such as smoking, family history, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, 
and diabetes. He should also be questioned about 
risk factors for a pulmonary embolus: smoking, prolonged immobility, leg swelling, family history, and 
known hypercoaguable disorder. In any chest pain 
patient, it is important to conduct a thorough review 
of systems and inquire about recent fevers, coughing, 
or other illness, as well as recent cardiac or esophageal 
procedures. 
Physical exam should focus on cardiopulmonary 
and abdominal exams, as well as assessing the extremities for peripheral edema and distal pulses, and the 
neck for jugular venous distension. All chest pain patients should quickly have an electrocardiogram (ECG) 
performed and interpreted by an EP. The American 
College of Emergency Physicians and the American 
College of Cardiology recommend that an ECG be 
performed within 10 minutes of arrival for all patients 
with chest pain. 12 Most EDs have quality standards 
that require an ECG to be performed and interpreted 
by an EP within 10 to 15 minutes of a patient’s arrival. 
Your patient reports that he “doesn’t go to the doctor” but 
has been told he has high blood pressure. He has a 40-pack-ayear smoking history, and his father died from a myocardial 
infarction (MI), or heart attack, at age 45. On physical exam, 
EXHIBIT 32-2
CHEST PAIN: 
CAN’T-MISS DIAGNOSES 
• acute coronary syndrome
o unstable angina 
o ST elevation myocardial infarction
o non-ST elevation myocardial infarction 
• aortic dissection
• pulmonary embolism 
• pneumothorax
• hemothorax
• pneumonia
• esophageal rupture
the patient appears sweaty and uncomfortable, but the exam 
is otherwise unremarkable. The nurse hands you the ECG 
(Figure 32-2). What are your next steps in management? 
The ECG shows an ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction (STEMI)—a true cardiac emergency. ST 
elevation on ECG indicates that damage (infarction) 
is occurring throughout all layers of the heart muscle. 
A thrombus (clot) has occluded blood supply to part 
of the heart, and heart muscle tissue is dying. 13 Once 
this is diagnosed, the EP must immediately initiate 
treatment, potentially before a full history or physical 
exam can be obtained. The patient should be placed 
on oxygen and should receive aspirin. He should 
receive nitroglycerin for ongoing pain. However, 
nitroglycerin can drop a patient’s blood pressure and 
should be used judiciously once IV access has been 
obtained (allowing fluid resuscitation if the patient 
becomes hypotensive). 
In many stateside military and civilian facilities, 
STEMI patients are taken immediately to the cardiac 
catheterization lab to undergo an invasive procedure 
to open the blocked artery. In the deployed setting, 
this resource is usually not available. Instead, patients 
can be given thrombolytics, which are IV medications 
that help break up the clot. These medications all 
carry risks of bleeding complications, and the patient 
should be counseled about their risks and benefits. 
After receiving thrombolytics, the patient will likely 
require transport to a higher level of care for cardiology consultation and intensive care management. In 
this case, the STEMI seen on ECG makes the patient’s 
disposition easy for the EP. But what if his ECG had 
been normal or shown nonspecific changes?
There are many other life-threatening causes of 
chest pain that can present with a normal or nonspeFigure 32-2. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram with ST segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF for an inferior acute 
myocardial infarction. April 12, 2005.
Reproduced from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
File:ECG_001.jpg 
465
Approach to the Emergency Patient
cific ECG. The patient should have additional blood 
work and imaging performed. A chest x-ray can be 
useful in showing a definitive diagnosis such as pneumothorax or pneumonia. If there is a high suspicion for 
an aortic dissection or pulmonary embolus, a CT of the 
chest with IV contrast should be obtained, because they 
are not readily diagnosed with a standard chest x-ray. 
Elevated cardiac enzymes may clinch the diagnosis of 
MI in a patient with a borderline ECG. 
Many patients who present to the ED with chest 
pain are admitted to the hospital, especially those 
who are older and have risk factors for acute coronary 
syndrome. It is difficult to exclude many of the lifethreatening causes of chest pain without a period of 
observation. Patients with potential cardiac risk factors 
and no etiology of their chest pain found in the ED 
require observation, repeat exams, repeat ECGs, and 
serial cardiac enzyme screens in addition to some form 
of stress test. According to the resources at a facility, 
this process may be done in the ED, a chest pain observation unit, or an inpatient ward, or via a coordinated 
outpatient approach. All patients who are discharged 
with a diagnosis of chest pain should have close followup with their primary care physician or appropriate 
specialist and should be given clear return precautions.
Headache
You are working in a stateside military ED and your next 
patient is a 45-year-old woman with a history of migraines, 
who presents with a chief complaint of a severe headache. 
The nurse pulls you aside and says, “This patient is here 
all the time. Just give her some pain meds for her headache 
and send her home.” What additional history do you need to 
obtain before treating the patient? What key questions can 
you ask to avoid missing any red flag headache diagnoses?
Three-quarters of Americans experience a headache each year, and headaches account for 2 million 
ED visits. 14 Most of these patients have a primary 
headache disorder such as migraines, cluster headaches, or tension-type headaches, and can be treated 
symptomatically and discharged. However, a subset 
have a “secondary” headache: a pathologic process 
such as a tumor or vascular event in which head pain 
is the presenting symptom. To help distinguish between a regular migraine headache and a headache 
with a potentially more serious cause (Exhibit 32-3), 
the patient should be asked additional questions. 
How did the pain start? What does it feel like? Does 
anything make the pain better or worse? Where is it 
located? What time of day is it worse? What medications are you taking? Are there associated symptoms 
such as fever, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, or 
neck stiffness? 
EXHIBIT 32-3
HEADACHE: 
CAN’T-MISS DIAGNOSES 
• intracranial hemorrhage
• meningitis
• intracranial mass
• cerebrovascular accident 
• acute angle closure glaucoma
• hypertensive encephalopathy
If the patient endorses fever and neck stiffness, this 
is concerning for meningitis, a life-threatening infection of the fluid around the brain and spinal cord. 
Many medications such as nitroglycerin, calcium 
channel blockers, and estrogen can have a side effect 
of headache, and many recreational drugs can cause 
headaches as well. If the patient has recently decreased 
her intake of caffeine, she may have a withdrawal 
headache. Multiple members of a family with new 
headaches, especially in the winter months, should 
raise suspicion for carbon monoxide poisoning. 14 
New headaches that worsen over a period of weeks, 
especially headaches that are worse in the morning, 
are concerning for elevated intracranial pressure from 
a mass lesion or neoplasm.
The patient states that pain started suddenly 30 minutes 
ago. She describes the headache as diffuse, severe, and nothing like her previous migraines. The patient rated her pain 
as 10/10 on a pain scale since the headache started. She feels 
dizzy and nauseated but has not vomited. 
There are many red flags in this patient’s history. 
Pain that is abrupt and maximal at onset is concerning 
for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. 14 The patient will need 
IV access, a careful neurological exam, and immediate 
non-contrast head CT. Except for glaucoma patients, 
virtually all patients presenting with headache should 
receive analgesia and should be kept in a quiet, dark 
area. 
All patients with headaches also require a thorough 
neurological exam. Tenderness over the sinuses or 
purulent drainage from the nose could indicate sinusitis. In elderly patients, the temporal arteries should 
be palpated to evaluate for temporal arteritis. Acute 
angle closure glaucoma can present with headache in 
addition to visual changes, conjunctival injection, and 
pupillary changes. If this diagnosis is suspected, patients should have their intraocular pressures checked. 
Any new deficit on neurological exam is an indication 
for further imaging. Patients with altered mental status 
or new onset seizures also require further imaging.
466
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
On exam, the patient appears in severe pain and mildly 
disoriented. The neurological exam is otherwise normal. 
The CT head scan is shown in Figure 32-3. What are your 
next interventions?
The patient’s CT scan shows a subarachnoid hemorrhage—a neurosurgical emergency. In the ED, the initial management involves resuscitation, reversal of any 
coagulopathies, and stabilization. The patient should 
be attached to a cardiac monitor and her BP should be 
carefully monitored. She will need frequent neurological exams, and if her neurological status deteriorates 
further, she will require intubation for airway protection. She will require neurosurgical consultation and 
will be admitted, likely to the intensive care unit (ICU), 
to be monitored for additional bleeding, vasospasm, 
and other complications. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, aspirin, and other blood-thinners should 
be avoided when treating her pain.
In managing headaches, special care should be given to certain populations. The elderly are unlikely to 
develop new onset migraines, and are at much higher 
risk for chronic subdural hematomas that can present 
with only mild headaches. Physicians should have a 
low threshold to order a CT scan on elderly patients 
with new onset headaches. 14 In pregnant patients, 
a headache can be the first sign of preeclampsia. If 
untreated, this condition can progress to eclampsia, 
cerebral hemorrhage, or both. Most headache patients 
with stable vital signs, a normal neurological exam, 
Figure 32-3. Computed tomography head scan showing 
subarachnoid hemorrhage.
and no red flags, and who improve with ED treatment, can be safely discharged without a specific 
diagnosis.
Trauma
You are working in the ED at deployed multinational 
hospital. You receive a trauma alert. The incoming patient 
is a 22-year-old male enlisted soldier injured in an improvised explosive device (IED) blast. The medic at the scene 
reports that the patient has altered mental status, bruising 
over his right chest and abdomen, and a right below-theknee amputation. His prehospital vitals are HR 130, BP 
80/60, RR 30, and Spo2 85% on room air. How will you 
systematically manage this patient when he arrives to the 
ED? What key interventions in the field could potentially 
save his life?
According to the Joint Theater Trauma Registry 
(JTTR), most combat-related injuries in Operation 
Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom 
occurred as a result of injury from explosions (78%), 
usually IEDs. Due to improvements in body armor, 
there was a low rate of thoracic injuries. The highest 
rate of injury was to the extremities (54%), followed 
by the abdomen, face, and head. JTTR statistics show 
that hemorrhage is the leading cause of potentially 
preventable combat-related death. Tactical Combat 
Casualty Care (TCCC) principles and practice have 
greatly reduced mortality from hemorrhage, along 
with damage control resuscitation and surgery, rapid 
patient evacuation, and sophisticated patient transport 
mechanisms. 15
Initial stabilization of trauma patients in the deployed setting may depend on self-care or a combat 
lifesaver or combat medic. Most medics and physicians 
in the deployed setting have been trained in TCCC 
(discussed in Chapter 33, Tactical Medicine), and the 
EP will likely also have been trained in Advanced 
Trauma Life Support. Both of these courses provide a 
standard, algorithmic approach to managing trauma 
that focuses on immediate stabilization of the patient’s 
life-threatening injuries. The pneumonic “XABCDE” 
can be used to remember the sequence of care in a 
trauma patient: first treat exsanguinating hemorrhage, 
then move on to airway, breathing, and circulation, 
followed by disability and exposure. When a threat 
to survival is found, it must be rapidly addressed and 
stabilized before moving on to the next letter. 
The patient arrives with a tourniquet in place at his 
right lower extremity amputation. He is immediately attached to a cardiac monitor and placed on supplemental 
oxygen. Bleeding is controlled and rapid assessment of his 
extremities shows no additional hemorrhage. His airway is 
intact and he is able to speak in short sentences, although 
467
Approach to the Emergency Patient
he is tachypneic, with decreased breath sounds on his right 
side. Vitals are HR 145, BP 80/40, RR 35, and Spo2 80% 
on supplemental oxygen. 
This collection of vital signs and physical exam 
findings is concerning for a tension pneumothorax, a 
respiratory emergency and form of obstructive shock. 
Air has built up in the pleural cavity and is putting 
pressure on the lung, preventing inflation and leading 
to hypoxia and hypotension from decreased venous 
return and pressure on the heart. The patient should 
undergo immediate needle decompression with a 
14-gauge needle followed by chest tube insertion. 
After these procedures, the patient’s hypoxia improves 
and you continue the primary survey. 
Circulation can be assessed quickly by palpating 
pulses. A palpable radial pulse indicates a systolic BP 
of at least 80, and a palpable femoral or carotid pulse 
indicates a BP of at least 60. Tachycardia and hypotension can be signs of shock, but it is important to 
remember that these may be late findings, especially 
in a healthy, active duty population. Certain trauma 
patients, such as the elderly, those in neurogenic shock, 
and those taking beta-blocker medications, may not 
be able to mount a tachycardic response. In any case, 
hemorrhagic shock should be treated aggressively 
with blood products, or fluids if blood is unavailable. 
The patient should have a quick evaluation of his 
mental status (D for disability). This can be performed 
using the pneumonic “AVPU”: alert/awake, verbal, 
painful, or unresponsive (Exhibit 32-4). Is the patient 
fully awake? Does he only respond to voice? Does he 
only respond to painful stimuli, or is he completely 
unresponsive? Also, he should be exposed from head 
to toe to evaluate for any additional injuries.
At this point in evaluation, additional studies are 
often performed as adjuncts to the primary survey. 
A positive FAST exam in an unstable patient is an 
indication for operative intervention. Trauma x-rays 
(usually with portable chest x-ray and portable pelvis 
EXHIBIT 32-4
“AVPU” SCALE FOR CONSCIOUSNESS 
ASSESSMENT 
• Alert. The patient is alert and awake.
• Verbal. The patient responds to verbal stimuli.
• Pain. The patient responds to painful stimuli.
• Unresponsive. The patient is unresponsive.
x-ray devices) are also performed at this point. A CT 
scan may be performed to further evaluate for specific 
injuries (Exhibit 32-5). 
Once the XABCDEs have been performed and immediate life threats addressed, the patient should be 
asked additional history and should undergo a headto-toe secondary survey. A pneumonic to guide the 
additional history is “AMPLE”: allergies, medications, 
past illnesses, last meal, and events involved in the 
trauma. The secondary survey consists of a systematic 
assessment of the patient, inspecting and palpating all 
body parts for injuries while also performing a more 
thorough neurological exam. As these steps are performed, a nurse or tech should send a panel of blood 
work to the lab. Depending on the nature and severity 
of the trauma, these may include a type and cross for 
blood, complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, 
lactate, coagulation panel, urinalysis, alcohol level, 
and drug screen. After these steps are completed, additional imaging can be ordered based on the results of 
the secondary survey and suspected injuries. This may 
include extremity x-rays, a retrograde urethrogram 
or cystogram, and CT scans of the head, spine, chest, 
abdomen, and pelvis. 16
Your patient’s vitals stabilize after needle decompression, 
chest tube placement, and blood transfusion. Initial portable 
chest x-ray shows a pneumothorax and right-sided pulmonary contusions (Figure 32-4). The FAST exam is negative. 
The secondary survey shows bruising and tenderness over 
the right side of the head but no ongoing bleeding at the 
amputated right lower leg with the tourniquet secured. The 
patient is sent for additional imaging. A CT head scan (Figure 
32-5) shows a right-sided subdural hematoma, and x-rays of 
the right leg are consistent with a traumatic below-the-knee 
amputation. What are your next steps in management?
EXHIBIT 32-5
TRAUMA: 
CAN’T-MISS DIAGNOSES 
• shock
• airway compromise
• tension pneumothorax
• massive hemothorax
• open pneumothorax
• flail chest
• cardiac tamponade
• brain herniation
• aortic disruption
• spinal injuries
• pelvic ring disruption
• hemoperitoneum
468
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 32-4. Chest x-ray showing right-sided pneumothorax.
Figure 32-5. Computed tomography head scan showing 
subdural hematoma.
The patient’s subdural hematoma will require urgent neurosurgical evaluation and possible surgery 
if his neurological status deteriorates. This is a case 
in which the deployed environment provides unique 
challenges. The patient presented to the ED at a multinational hospital, where a neurosurgeon is likely available. If he had presented further forward, he would 
have required evacuation, possibly by a critical care air 
transport (CCATT) or tactical critical care evacuation 
(TCCET) team, to get him to neurosurgical care in an 
expeditious manner. He will need to be admitted to the 
hospital, likely to an ICU setting, for continued management of his chest tube, neurosurgical evaluation 
of his subdural hematoma, and orthopedics, trauma, 
and/or vascular evaluation of his amputation. Once 
these conditions have stabilized to the point where he 
is deemed safe for flight, he will require transport out 
of theater by a CCATT team.
Shock
You are working in a stateside military ED. Your next 
patient is a 22-year-old male who collapsed after his physical fitness test (PFT) and is carried in by his friends. His 
skin is warm and flushed and he appears confused. His is 
tachycardic, with HR 138 and BP 70/40. Your colleagues 
begin to attach the patient to monitoring devices and start 
two large-bore IV lines. You know minimal history at this 
point, but the patient’s vital sign abnormalities are concerning for shock. 
Shock refers to a state of hypoperfusion in which 
oxygen delivery to the tissues is inadequate to meet the 
metabolic demands of the body. Broadly speaking, it is 
defined as a mismatch between tissue oxygen demand 
and supply that results in cellular death. 17 If shock is 
not rapidly treated, it leads to end-organ failure and 
death. There are four broad categories of shock: hypovolemic, cardiogenic, distributive, and obstructive 
(Table 32-1). 17 
Hypovolemic shock is the most common, especially 
in the deployed environment. It is defined as a loss of 
circulatory volume, most commonly from hemorrhage 
or dehydration. Treatment focuses on volume expansion with blood, crystalloid, or both as indicated. 18 
Cardiogenic shock is caused by cardiac dysfunction, 
usually from an MI, and the heart pump is unable to 
meet the demands of the body’s tissues. Treatment 
involves judicious use of fluids, inotropes for pump 
support, and reperfusion therapy for MI. Obstructive 
shock involves some blockage of blood leading into 
or out of the heart, either from a physical blockage 
such as a massive pulmonary embolus, or a pressuregradient blockage caused by a tension pneumothorax 
or cardiac tamponade. The causes of obstructive shock 
may all present as pulseless electrical activity (PEA) 
and should all be considered when working through 
the “H”s and “T”s during a code (see the Cardiac Arrest section below). Lastly, distributive shock results in 
vasodilatation caused by the release of inflammatory 
469
Approach to the Emergency Patient
TABLE 32-1
CATEGORIES AND CAUSES OF SHOCK
Category
Causes
Hypovolemic
Trauma
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Severe dehydration (gastroenteritis, 
burns)
Cardiogenic
Acute myocardial infarction
Rate problems: bradycardia or tachycardia
Toxins
Cardiomyopathy
Distributive
Sepsis
Anaphylaxis
Neurogenic
Toxins
Obstructive
Pericardial tamponade
Pulmonary embolism 
Tension pneumothorax
mediators and cytokines, which leads to a decrease 
in systemic vascular resistance and a compensatory 
increase in cardiac output. Sepsis is the most common 
cause, but anaphylaxis, neurological injuries, and certain toxins can also cause this presentation. 17
Patients with shock require the EP’s immediate 
attention. Often the EP must begin treatment simultaneously with the history and exam, and before 
diagnosing the shock state’s etiology. The EP should 
rapidly assess the patient’s general appearance and 
vital signs. Patients in shock will often be hypotensive, tachycardic, and tachypneic. If the patient has 
respiratory distress or is unable to protect his airway 
secondary to confusion, he may require intubation. 
Supplemental oxygen should be considered for all 
patients, and most patients will benefit from two 
large-bore IVs and fluids. 
Patients in septic shock in particular may require 
large volumes of crystalloid fluid. If the blood pressure does not improve after 1 to 2 L of crystalloid, 
or if the patient is unable to tolerate large volumes 
of fluid (particularly the elderly and patients with 
heart failure), vasoactive medications, such as norepinephrine or dopamine, may be required to increase 
blood pressure and improve tissue perfusion. All 
patients presumed to be in septic shock should have 
labs ordered to look for the source of infection (blood 
cultures, urinalysis, urine cultures, cerebrospinal fluid 
tests, etc) and be started on early, broad-spectrum 
antibiotic therapy. As the patient is stabilized, the EP 
can obtain a more detailed history and perform a full 
physical exam.
Your patient continues to be hypotensive, tachycardic, 
and tachypneic. He is able to speak in short sentences, but has 
swelling to his face and airway. You noticed diffuse urticaria 
all over his body, and wheezing on lung exam. His friends 
state that they saw him get stung by a bee after the PFT, so 
they brought him to the ED.
In this case, a more thorough history and exam 
points to a clear etiology for the patient’s symptoms: 
distributive shock secondary to anaphylaxis from a 
bee sting. The mainstay of treatment for anaphylaxis is 
aggressive fluid resuscitation and epinephrine to counteract vasodilation and bronchospasm. Epinephrine is 
typically given subcutaneously initially, but may also 
be given via an IV route. 18
The patient receives a 2-L normal saline bolus, 0. 3 mg of 
1:1,000 subcutaneous epinephrine, 50 mg of IV diphenhydramine, and 125 mg of IV methylprednisolone and albuterol 
given via nebulization. He remains slightly tachycardic, 
but has gradual normalization of his blood pressure. His 
wheezing and airway edema improve after the epinephrine 
and nebulizer treatment. During a repeat exam, he is awake, 
alert, oriented appropriately, able to speak in full sentences, 
and in no respiratory distress. He is discharged from the ED 
after 6 hours of observation, with an EpiPen (Mylan Inc, 
Hatfield, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom), clear instructions 
to carry it with him at all times, and a follow-up referral to 
his primary care manager.
Patients with this type of shock may sometimes be 
discharged from the ED. Patients with anaphylaxis 
who are asymptomatic after one dose of epinephrine 
can be observed for 4 to 6 hours and, if they remain 
asymptomatic, safely discharged. Observation is 
necessary because some patients may require a 
repeat dose of epinephrine. Nearly all other patients 
who present in shock will require admission, often 
to the ICU, for continued fluid resuscitation and 
hemodynamic monitoring. In the deployed setting, 
patients in shock are stabilized and then transported 
out of theater by CCATT, whose staff are able to 
continue treatment with vasoactive medications, blood 
products, antibiotics, and fluids en route to the next 
level of care. Indicators that shock has resolved include 
normalization of vital signs, improved urine output, 
down-trending lactate, and normal volume status. 18
It is important to remember that certain special 
populations will present differently. In pediatrics, the 
most common causes of shock are dehydration secondary to infectious gastroenteritis and hemorrhagic shock 
secondary to trauma. 17 Pediatric patients are able to 
compensate for a large amount of volume loss with 
minimal change in vital signs. Thus, they can appear 
470
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
well even in the early stages in shock. When these 
compensatory mechanisms fail, they will deteriorate 
rapidly, and the EP must be ready to intervene. In 
contrast, the elderly have limited reserves and are often 
unable to tolerate the hemodynamic changes of shock. 
The elderly are more susceptible to infectious diseases 
and are also more likely to present with cardiogenic 
shock. Underlying comorbidities such as cardiac or 
renal disease may make them unable to tolerate aggressive fluid resuscitation. The EP may need to treat 
these patients with small fluid boluses and monitor 
them closely for the development of complications 
such as pulmonary edema.
Poisoning
You are working in the ED in a forward deployed location. Your next patient is a 22-year-old female brought in 
by her roommates. They state, “We found her in her bed, 
acting confused. We’re worried that she took something. 
She’s been really sad lately.” What are key questions to ask 
the patient and her roommates? What are your initial orders 
to your nurse? What further tests will you order to work up 
her possible ingestion?
Poisonings, whether from an accidental or intentional ingestion, are a common ED complaint. The field 
of toxicology is a subspecialty of emergency medicine. 
It is estimated that at least 5 million poisonings occur in 
the United States each year, although the actual number may be even higher due to underreporting. 19 The 
poisoned ED patient can present in conditions ranging from completely awake, alert, and asymptomatic 
to completely obtunded with unstable vital signs. As 
with any ED patient, assessment begins as soon as the 
EP looks at the patient and continues with the ABCs. 
Initial priorities are securing the patient’s airway 
and treating potentially reversible causes of her altered 
mental status. These treatments, often referred to as the 
“coma cocktail,” include 100% oxygen to treat hypoxia, 
a finger-stick glucose test to evaluate for hypoglycemia 
(followed by the administration of dextrose if glucose 
is low), and naloxone to reverse an opioid overdose. If 
chronic alcoholism is suspected, thiamine can be given 
before glucose. If the patient is obtunded, the airway 
should be secured with intubation. Many toxins can 
affect breathing. Opioids will decrease the respiratory 
rate, salicylates can increase the respiratory rate and 
cause pulmonary edema, and various inhalants may 
cause bronchospasm. As the ABCs are addressed and 
concerning conditions stabilized, the EP must also remember to place the patient on “suicide watch” with 
a sitter in the room who can provide 1:1 supervision. 20
If the patient is able to talk, or if there are others 
who can provide the history, it is important to ask the 
following questions: What was ingested? How much 
was ingested? When did this occur? Why? (Was it an 
accidental or intentional overdose?) A head-to-toe 
physical exam should be performed on all patients, 
paying particular attention to vital signs, mental status, pupils, skin, and presence of track marks or other 
evidence of drug use. Some poisonings cause common, 
recognizable “toxidromes,” described in Exhibit 32-6. 20
The patient is sleepy and reluctant to answer your questions, and protecting her airway. Physical exam is remarkable only for mild right upper quadrant tenderness. On 
further questioning, her friends report that they last saw 
her 4 hours ago. When they found her in her dorm room, 
there was an empty bottle of acetaminophen next to her bed. 
When confronted, the patient is unable to tell you exactly 
how many she took. She states that she “just wanted to sleep 
and not feel sad anymore.” 
Although additional history has helped identify the 
patient’s likely ingestion, she should still undergo a 
broad workup to look for complications of her ingestion and to identify any possible co-ingestions. Most 
acutely poisoned patients are worked up with cardiac 
EXHIBIT 32-6
POISONING “TOXIDROMES” 
Anticholinergic
• mad as a hatter (altered mental status)
• blind as a bat (mydriasis)
• hot as Hades
• red as a beet
• dry as a bone
Cholinergic
• salivation
• lacrimation
• urination
• defecation
• gastrointestinal upset
• excessive bradycardia
Sympathomimetic
• tachycardia
• hypertension
• mydriasis
• diaphoresis
• hyperthermia
• agitation
Opioid
• miosis
• apnea
• hypoxia
• flash pulmonary edema (rare)
471
Approach to the Emergency Patient
monitoring; an ECG; complete blood count; comprehensive metabolic panel, acetaminophen, salicylate, 
and ethanol levels; urinalysis; and urine or serum drug 
screen. Females of childbearing age should be tested 
for pregnancy. If the patient has metabolic acidosis, 
a serum osmolality may help further narrow the differential. Other than acetaminophen, salicylates, and 
ethanol, tests for specific levels of a toxin (eg, methanol) 
are usually sent to a lab, but results take several days. 
The EP must treat presumptively based on the history, 
exam, and other lab findings. 
In treating the poisoned patient, the EP must 
consider methods of preventing absorption or aiding elimination of the toxin. These include activated 
charcoal, whole bowel irrigation, and gastric lavage. 
Activated charcoal is given PO or via nasogastric tube 
to absorb toxins still in the gastrointestinal tract. It is 
most effective if given within 1 hour of toxin ingestion, 
but is occasionally given later for extended-release 
toxins or potentially lethal ingestions. 21 It does not bind 
metals, alcohols, or hydrocarbons and should be used 
cautiously in patients with altered mental status, who 
are at increased risk for aspiration. 
Whole bowel irrigation is infrequently utilized and 
involves giving the patient polyethylene glycol solution (eg, GoLytely [Braintree Laboratories; Braintree, 
MA]) to flush out the bowel and prevent the absorption 
of a toxin. It is occasionally used for patients who have 
ingested extended-release preparations and patients 
with illicit drug packet ingestions (“body packers”). 
Gastric lavage is seldom performed due to a high risk 
of aspiration and questionable benefits. However, if a 
patient presents immediately after a lethal ingestion, 
it may be attempted. It involves a very large orogastric 
tube that is instilled with water to flush and remove 
pill fragments from the stomach. 19
Your patient confesses that she took the acetaminophen 
about 4 hours ago, placing her outside the window for gastric 
lavage or activated charcoal. She denies co-ingestions. While 
in the ED, she begins to have nausea and several episodes of 
non-bloody, non-bilious emesis. Her labs are unremarkable, 
other than an acetaminophen level of 240. What are your 
next steps in management?
Acetaminophen is one of the most common and 
most dangerous ingestions seen in the ED. Because 
an acute ingestion will often have minimal symptoms, and because the potential for long-term liver 
damage is high, the EP should consider checking 
acetaminophen levels for every poisoned patient. In 
overdose, acetaminophen is metabolized to N-acetylp-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), which causes liver 
damage. Levels can be plotted on Rumack-Matthew 
nomogram. A level of 150 or greater at 4 hours is considered toxic. Patients with a toxic ingestion should 
be started on the antidote, N-acetylcysteine. Starting 
this antidote promptly after ingestion can prevent liver 
damage and death.
The patient is started on N-acetylcysteine and admitted 
to the ICU for monitoring. Once she is medically cleared, 
she is given a psychiatric evaluation and transported back 
to the United States for continued psychiatric treatment. 
Most poisoned patients are admitted to the hospital, 
often to the ICU, for close cardiopulmonary monitoring. If a poisoned patient is asymptomatic after several 
hours of observation in the ED, they may possibly be 
safe for discharge after psychiatric evaluation. Consultation with a poison control center, if available, is 
recommended. In the deployed setting, patients who 
present with an intentional ingestion as a suicide attempt will likely need to be removed from theater and 
transported back to the United States for psychiatric 
treatment.
Cardiac Arrest
You are working in a stateside military ED. You receive a 
911 call stating that a 65-year-old male collapsed on the golf 
course and became unresponsive. The medical technicians 
that you sent to the scene report that the patient is pulseless 
and apneic. Basic life support (BLS) has been started. How 
will you manage this patient in the ED? What instructions 
should you give your technicians as they are en route to the 
hospital?
An estimated 250,000 Americans die each year from 
unexpected cardiac arrest. Many of these cases occur 
outside of a hospital, and most occur in men aged 50 to 
75 who have underlying heart disease. 22 In a way, the 
cardiac arrest patient is the quintessential emergency 
medicine patient: obviously sick and in need of rapid 
assessment and interventions that, if performed correctly, may make the difference between life and death. 
Managing a cardiac arrest and its aftermath can be an 
intellectually stimulating yet emotionally draining 
experience for the EP. In an arrest, the EP will end up 
treating not only the patient, but also his or her family, 
who will require extensive explanation and support, 
whatever the outcome. 
The initial goals in managing a cardiac arrest 
include the principles of BLS: to “support or restore 
effective oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation until 
return of spontaneous circulation or until ACLS [advanced cardiac life support] interventions can be initiated.”23 BLS focuses on early defibrillation and effective 
chest compressions. The old pneumonic “ABC” has 
been altered to “CAB” for these patients to shift focus 
to early, effective chest compressions. First responders should check for a carotid pulse for no more than 
10 seconds. If no pulse is present, responders should 
472
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
start cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), pushing 
hard and fast, 100 to 120 compressions per minute, 
and allowing full chest recoil between compressions. 
The patient should receive two rescue breaths with a 
pocket mask or bag valve mask between compressions. 
The airway should be opened with a head tilt, chin 
lift technique, or jaw thrust technique in the setting of 
trauma. An automated external defibrillator should 
be attached to the patient as soon as possible, and the 
patient should be shocked as recommended by the 
defibrillator. 23
As more advanced practitioners arrive on scene, 
and once the patient arrives in the ED, more advanced 
resuscitation techniques can be started. The ACLS process continues to emphasize early, effective CPR, but 
also includes advanced airway techniques, such as intubation, and IV medications such as epinephrine and 
amiodarone. End-tidal capnography can be a useful 
adjunct to evaluate the effectiveness of compressions 
and the correct placement of the endotracheal tube. 
The patient arrives in the ED pulseless and apneic. CPR 
and bag valve mask ventilation are in process. He is attached 
to a cardiac monitor, which shows ventricular fibrillation 
(Figure 32-6).
Cardiac arrest from a primary cardiac disorder often 
presents with this rhythm or with pulseless ventricular 
tachycardia, which is treated in the same manner. In 
these patients, early defibrillation has been shown to 
increase survival. If defibrillation is performed within 
the first minute or two of an arrest, as many as 90% of 
patients return to their baseline neurological status. 23 
The ACLS algorithm involves defibrillation followed 
by 2 minutes of CPR, defibrillation, IV epinephrine, 
and IV amiodarone. IV access should be obtained as 
quickly as possible, and if IV access is not immediately available, an interosseous line should be placed 
instead. Many ACLS medications can also be given 
via the endotracheal tube, but given the widespread 
availability of interosseous lines and their ease of insertion, the endotracheal tube method is being used 
less frequently. A finger-stick glucose screen should 
be rapidly obtained because hypoglycemia can be a 
rapidly reversible cause of altered mental status and 
cardiac arrest. 
The patient receives two shocks and two rounds of IV 
epinephrine and IV amiodarone. He remains pulseless and 
apneic. On the next rhythm check, the cardiac monitor shows 
PEA (Figure 32-7).
PEA is defined as cardiac electrical activity without 
associated mechanical pumping. 23 Successful resuscitation of a patient in PEA should be focused on rapidly 
identifying and treating the cause. The EP may think 
of the “H”s and “T”s (Exhibit 32-7) to remember all the 
potential causes of PEA. All patients in PEA should be 
treated with oxygen and ideally intubated to correct for 
hypoxia. As discussed previously, a finger-stick glucose screen can rapidly identify hypoglycemia. Blood 
that is rapidly run through an i-STAT machine (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL) can be used to identify 
hypokalemia or hyperkalemia and acidosis. Patients 
in PEA should be kept warm. A bedside ultrasound 
can be performed to evaluate for cardiac tamponade 
and to evaluate the right side of the heart for changes 
consistent with a large pulmonary embolus. Based 
on the clinical scenario, the patient may require an 
emergent pericardiocentesis to treat a tamponade, 
Figure 32-6. Rhythm strip showing ventricular fibrillation.
Reproduced from: https://commons.m.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:De-Rhythm_ventricular_fibrillation_(CardioNetworks_
ECGpedia).png.
Figure 32-7. Rhythm strip showing pulseless electrical 
activity. 
Reproduced from: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Pulseless_electrical_activity.
EXHIBIT 32-7
CARDIAC ARREST “H”S AND “T”s 
• hypovolemia
• hypoxia
• hydrogen ion (acidosis)
• hyper/hypokalemia
• hypoglycemia
• hypothermia
• toxins
• tamponade (cardiac)
• tension pneumothorax
• thrombosis (acute coronary syndrome and pulmonary embolism)
473
Approach to the Emergency Patient
needle decompression for tension pneumothorax, or 
IV thrombolytics for suspected pulmonary embolus 
or MI. The patient should continue to receive highquality CPR and IV epinephrine every 3 to 5 minutes. 
If a reversible cause of PEA is not rapidly discovered 
and corrected, the patient’s prognosis is extremely 
poor. Only 1% to 4% of patients with PEA survive to 
hospital discharge24 (see Exhibit 32-7).
After several rounds of epinephrine, intubation, IV fluids, and a normal blood glucose level, the patient remains 
pulseless. His rhythm strip shows asystole (Figure 32-8).
Asystole has a very poor prognosis because even 
minutes without oxygen to the brain portends very 
poor functional outcomes. For patients in asystole, 
treatment should still be focused on restoring perfusion with high-quality CPR and identifying a reversible 
cause. After 20 minutes of combined BLS and ACLS, 
resuscitation is unlikely to be successful. Bedside ultrasound can be a useful adjunct in evaluating for cardiac 
activity. If the patient has been in asystole for 20 minutes and shows no cardiac activity on ultrasound, it 
is reasonable to stop resuscitative efforts. The EP must 
then ensure that the patient’s family is updated and 
their questions are answered. If possible, the patient’s 
primary care doctor should be contacted as well.
Only a small percentage of resuscitated cardiac 
arrest patients survive to hospital discharge, and of 
those that do survive, many suffer from anoxic brain 
Figure 32-8. Rhythm strip showing asystole. 
Reproduced from: https://commons.m.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:EKG_Asystole.jpg.
injury. If the patient regains a pulse but does not 
regain consciousness, the EP should initiate targeted 
temperature management. Randomized control trials 
do not show any benefit of therapeutic hypothermia 
versus targeted temperature management. Maintaining a constant temperature between 32° and 36°C 
for at least 24 hours postarrest is the current recommendation, and this has been shown to improve both 
survival rates to hospital discharge and neurological 
outcomes. 24 The procedure is usually started in the ED 
and continued in the ICU once the patient is admitted. 
If acute coronary syndrome is suspected, the postarrest 
patient should be strongly considered for emergent 
cardiac catheterization. 
Case-Based Approach Summary 
The above cases are only a sample of the lifethreatening chief complaints an EP may encounter. 
They are meant to emphasize the common processes 
in the approach to the emergency medicine patient, 
regardless of initial patient complaint. In these cases, 
the EP must quickly determine whether the patient is 
“sick or not sick.” Another key skill is the ability of the 
EP to simultaneously obtain history and diagnoses, 
while starting to treat the patient. Unlike the orderly, 
thorough approach to the patient history taught in 
medical schools, the EP must quickly obtain basic history while simultaneously relaying orders to nurses 
and technicians and rapidly thinking through a list 
of “can’t miss/worst case scenario” diagnoses. This is 
often done with incomplete records and potentially 
no help from the patient themselves if they are in 
extremis. These cases also emphasize the challenges 
in diagnosis and treatment based on the EP’s practice 
environment: forward deployed location, theater hospital, or stateside medical facility. Once initial patient 
stabilization is complete, the EP can focus on the next 
phase of patient care: disposition. 
DISPOSITION
Potential dispositions from the ED include admission to the hospital for observation, additional workup, 
or directly to the operating suite; transfer to a different 
facility with a higher level of care; discharge home or 
to self-care; and of course, unfortunately, transfer to 
the morgue. The EP must consider numerous factors to 
determine the most appropriate place for disposition. 
For example, considering a terminal patient whose 
primary issue is managing pain and maintaining quality of life, sending them home may be the best course. 
Their terminal disease will not be cured by a hospital 
admission, and admission can in fact be detrimental 
(the hospital can expose patients to numerous nosocomial infections and be less comfortable). Discharge 
home is appropriate as long as pain medications can 
be administered at home. 
The decision to admit or discharge a patient is 
one of the unique challenges of emergency medicine. 
The EP must make this decision in a timely manner, 
often with an incomplete history of present illness, 
minimal to no knowledge of the patient’s past medical history, and equivocal testing. Although this can 
seem daunting at first, the skilled EP can often make 
a disposition decision after their first interaction 
474
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
with a patient. Performing serial examinations and 
discussing the case with a consultant can help the 
EP decide. 
When collaborating with consultants, it is essential that the EP remain an advocate for the patient. 
Consultants generally prefer brief presentations 
with specific requests or questions. In the case of the 
previous chest pain patient, a consulting cardiologist might expect to hear, “I have a 55-year-old man 
with multiple cardiac risk factors who presents with 
a STEMI on ECG. We have treated him with aspirin, 
nitroglycerin, and heparin, and would like him to go 
to the cath lab. Could you come evaluate him in the 
ED? Are there any other treatments you would like us 
to start?” Depending on the case and resources at the 
facility, a consultant may evaluate the patient in the 
ED and ultimately discharge him, admit the patient 
primarily, or manage the patient alongside another 
service (usually internal medicine). When possible, it 
is always better for a patient if the consultant examines 
them in person rather than providing advice over 
the phone. In many EDs, and especially in austere or 
forward deployed settings, this is often not possible. 
Specialist consultants may be in other parts of the 
country or region, or stateside. In these cases, sending 
pictures of ECGs and other images to the consultant 
may be the next best course of action. Some hospitals 
have telemedicine services, in which a consultant 
(often a neurologist for a stroke patient), can evaluate 
the patient via a video monitoring system. 
When patients require admission, the EP must determine if they can be admitted to the current facility 
or if they require a transfer. In the stateside military 
setting, patients requiring admission may need transfer to a higher level of care; many stateside military 
hospitals do not provide neurosurgical capabilities. 
The patient presenting with a subarachnoid hemorrhage might require transfer to a civilian facility for 
further care. In the deployed setting, transfer becomes 
an even larger challenge. The deployed patient presenting with a ruptured ectopic pregnancy would 
certainly require transfer to a higher level of care for 
surgical treatment. 
If transfer is required, the EP’s next question is 
how to most safely transport the patient: by air or by 
ground. This decision will rely on a multitude of factors including the stability of the patient, the resources 
of the facility, weather conditions, and the location 
of the accepting hospital. This decision will often be 
made in consultation with the accepting provider at 
the next level of care. 
If the patient is admitted to the same facility, the 
EP may need to write admission orders for the inpatient unit. These should be done in consultation with 
the admitting physician and should make clear that 
the admitting physician should be contacted for any 
change in the patient’s status. Admitting the patient 
may require phone calls to multiple consultants to 
coordinate care. 
Many patients can be safely discharged from the 
ED. However, the decision to discharge can produce 
anxiety for the EP and for the patient, especially if the 
patient is being discharged without a clear diagnosis. 
As discussed throughout the chapter, the purpose of 
an evaluation in an ED is to recognize and stabilize 
life-threatening conditions. Often, a skilled EP is able 
to determine that there is no life-threatening condition present and no reason for admission, but the 
cause of the patient’s chest pain, abdominal pain, or 
other symptom, is still unclear. In these circumstances, the EP must have a discussion with the patient 
about what has been done in the ED, what the next 
steps should be (primary care follow-up, outpatient 
follow-up with a specialist, further testing as an outpatient, trial of medication, etc), and any reasons to 
return to the ED. 
Patients should be told what they should do to 
improve their condition, for example, ice, rest, elevation, and antiinflammatory medication for an ankle 
sprain. What the patient is NOT allowed to do should 
also be clearly written in the discharge instructions. 
For example, a patient presenting with a first-time 
seizure may be stable for discharge with outpatient 
neurology follow-up, but should be counseled not 
to drive or engage in other high-risk activities. In the 
military setting, particularly the deployed setting, 
patients with mild traumatic brain injury/concussion 
may be in a condition to be discharged, but should be 
counseled to avoid all strenuous physical activity until 
headache and other symptoms completely resolve and 
they have been cleared by their primary care doctor 
or neurologist.
Patients should be told when and where to follow 
up. For high-risk patients such as infants, pregnant 
women, and the elderly, and for high-risk complaints 
such as abdominal pain and chest pain, it is preferable 
if the EP can arrange a specific appointment for the 
patient to follow up, ideally in 24 to 48 hours, for a 
repeat evaluation. If this is not possible and the EP is 
truly concerned for the patient, the best option may be 
to have the patient return to the ED in 24 to 48 hours 
for a recheck. This procedure has often been used for 
undifferentiated abdominal pain in which appendicitis 
has not been ruled out. 
475
Approach to the Emergency Patient
SUMMARY
The approach to the emergency medicine patient, 
though different from other fields in medicine, should 
involve fundamentals of emergency care during 
evaluation and treatment of acute conditions. Perform 
rapid “doorway” assessments, determine whether 
the patient is sick or not sick, establish a safety net, 
check for red flags, and provide resource-appropriate 
diagnostics and treatment. Utilizing lessons in this 
chapter can help non-emergency MMPs provide better patient care.
REFERENCES
 
1. Schneider SM, Hamilton GC, Moyer P, Stapczynski JS. Definition of emergency medicine. Acad Emerg Med. 1998;5:348–
351.
 
2. Mahadevan SV, Garmel GM. An Introduction to Clinical Emergency Medicine. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press; 2005.
 
3. American College of Emergency Physicians. The uninsured: Access to medical care. ACEP website. https://www.acep.
org/News-Media-top-banner/The-Uninsured--Access-To-Medical-Care/. Published 2016. Accessed February 12, 2017.
 
4. Sun BC, Burstin HR, Brennan TA. Predictors and outcomes of frequent emergency department users. Acad Emerg Med. 
2003;10:320–328.
 
5. Vinton DT, Capp R, Rooks SP, Abbott JT, Ginde AA. Frequent users of US emergency departments: Characteristics 
and opportunities for intervention. Emerg Med J. 2014;31(7):526–532. doi:10. 1136/emermed-2013-202407.
 
6. Ku BS, Fields JM, Santana A, Wasserman D, Borman L, Scott KC . The urban homeless: super-users of the emergency 
department. Popul Health Manag. 2014;17:366–371. doi:10. 1089/pop. 2013. 0118.
 
7. Clarke ME, Pierson W. Management of elder abuse in the emergency department. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 
1999;17:631–644,vi.
 
8. McCloskey LA, Lichter E, Ganz ML, et al. Intimate partner violence and patient screening across medical specialties. 
Acad Emerg Med. 2005;12:712–722.
 
9. Jain AM. Emergency department evaluation of child abuse. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 1999;17:575–593,v.
 10. Work RO. Department of Defense Detainee Program. Washington, DC: DoD; August 19, 2014. DoD Directive 2310. 01E. 
http://www.jag.navy.mil/distrib/instructions/DoDD2310. 01E_Detainee_Program.pdf. Accessed February 12, 2017.
 11. Hastings RS, Powers RD. Abdominal pain in the ED: A 35 year retrospective. Am J Emerg Med. 2011;29(7):711–716. 
 12. American Heart Association. Recommendations for criteria for STEMI systems of care. http://www.heart.org/
HEARTORG/Professional/MissionLifelineHomePage/EMS/Recommendations-for-Criteria-for-STEMI-Systems-ofCare_UCM_312070_Article.jsp#.WKA2UmR95AY. Updated October 4, 2016. Accessed February 12, 2017.
 13. Antman E. ST-elevation myocardial infarction. In: Fuster V, ed. The AHA Guidelines and Scientific Statements Handbook. 
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009: 55. 
 14. Lynch KM, Brett F. Headaches that kill: a retrospective study of incidence, etiology and clinical features in cases of 
sudden death. Cephalalgia. 2012;32:972–798.
 15. Beekley AC, Bohman H, Schindler D. Modern warfare. In: Savitsky E, Eastridge B, eds. Combat Casualty Care: Lessons 
Learned from OEF and OIF. Ft Detrick, MD: Borden Institute; 2012: chap 1. http://www.cs.amedd.army.mil/borden/
book/ccc/UCLAchp1.pdf. Accessed March 17, 2017.
 16. Kman NE. Trauma. Clerkship Directors in Emergency Medicine (CDEM) curriculum. http://www.cdemcurriculum.
org/index.php/ssm/show_ssm/approach_to/trauma. Updated 2008. Accessed March 17, 2017.
476
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 17. Oker E. Shock. In: Hamilton H, ed. Emergency Medicine: An Approach to Clinical Problem Solving. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: WB Saunders; 2003: 60–74.
 18. Avegno J. Shock. Clerkship Directors in Emergency Medicine (CDEM) curriculum. http://www.cdemcurriculum.org/
index.php/ssm/show_ssm/approach_to/shock. Updated 2008. Accessed March 17, 2017.
 19. Wilson R, Wolf L. The poisoned patient. In: Hamilton H, ed. Emergency Medicine: An Approach to Clinical Problem Solving. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2003: 259–285.
 20. Thibodeau L. Poisoning. Clerkship Directors in Emergency Medicine (CDEM) curriculum. https://cdemcurriculum.
com/poisonings/. Updated 2008. Accessed October 10, 2017.
 21. Charcoal, activated. Drugs.com. https://www.drugs.com/monograph/charcoal-activated.html. Accessed January 25, 
2018.
 22. Lawson L. Cardiac arrest. Clerkship Directors in Emergency Medicine (CDEM) curriculum. https://cdemcurriculum.
com/cardiac-arrest/. Updated 2008. Accessed October 10, 2017.
 23. Leschke R. Cardiopulmonary and cerebral resuscitation. In: Mahadevan S, Garmel G, eds. An Introduction to Clinical 
Emergency Medicine. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2005: 47–62.
 24. Neumar RW, Shuster M, Callaway CW, et al. Part 1: executive summary: 2015 American Heart Association guidelines 
update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2015;132(18 suppl 2):315–367.
