153
Tactical Field Skills for the Military Physician
Chapter 10
TACTICAL FIELD SKILLS FOR THE 
MILITARY PHYSICIAN
SEAN MULVANEY, MD,* and TONY S. KIM, MD†
INTRODUCTION
THE PROBLEM AND NEED FOR TRAINING
SHOOT
Weapons Training
Combatives
MOVE
Principles of Navigation
Driving Military Vehicles
Convoy Operations
Personal Equipment and Moving
COMMUNICATE
ADDITIONAL OPERATIONAL MEDICAL TRAINING
Flight Medicine
Dive Medicine
Airborne
Survival, Evasion, Resistance, Escape
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Military Bearing
Medical Evacuation and Mass Casualty Planning and Training
Preventive Medicine
Operational and Intelligence Briefings
Time Management
SUMMARY
*Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army; Associate Professor, Department of Military & Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
†Colonel, Medical Corps, US Air Force; Assistant Professor, Department of Military & Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
154
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
There are two compelling reasons for military physicians to learn and hone the basics of military combat 
skills. The first is that the physician must never be a 
liability for the supported unit. The second is that by 
fundamentally understanding the demands of the 
unit’s mission-essential tasks, the physician is better 
able to interpret injury patterns and set reasonable 
return-to-duty requirements and limitations. In addition, learning these skills establishes a set of shared 
experiences that facilitate effective communication 
between physician and patient. 
At its core, soldiering skills consist of being able to 
safely and effectively shoot, move, and communicate. 
Each of these basic tasks has a series of implied tasks. 
For example, to shoot, one must first know how to 
safely handle and sight-in (or “zero”) the weapon. 
To move, one must know how to establish his or 
her position and navigate. According to the tenets of 
the Geneva Conventions, medical personnel are not 
combatants and are entitled to certain protections 
(so long as they are working exclusively in a medical 
role and not participating in acts harmful to the enemy). 1–3 However, the vast majority of armed conflicts 
the United States has engaged in since World War II 
include combatants that do not adhere to the Geneva 
Conventions. Thus, the physician cannot assume the 
protections of Geneva Conventions status and must 
be prepared to be treated as a combatant. 
As a rule, units are willing to facilitate teaching their 
assigned physician combat skills if he or she shows an 
interest. It is beneficial to the unit to have a physician 
who is independent and competent in a combat zone; a 
physician cannot execute the critical medical role if he 
or she is lost or dead. Deployable medical units have 
a cadre with the responsibility to teach basic combat 
skills to their medical providers. In other units, a physician with initiative and persistence will find trained 
personnel and resources to help. Learning combat 
skills is experiential; reading it in a book, seeing it on 
a video, or being told what to do will not suffice. The 
skills must be performed, and becoming proficient in 
them takes time, in some cases years. Although these 
skills may never be used in combat, they are worth 
learning and will increase the physician’s ability to 
both care for and relate to patients. Although the easiest time to learn these skills is early in one’s career, it 
is never too late to begin and it is always appropriate 
to review and refresh these skills on a regular basis. 
Vice Admiral Joel Boone is arguably among the best 
examples of a combat physician. This is his Medal of 
Honor Citation from World War I:
For extraordinary heroism, conspicuous gallantry, 
and intrepidity while serving with the 6th Regiment, 
U.S. Marines, in actual conflict with the enemy. With 
absolute disregard for personal safety, ever conscious 
and mindful of the suffering fallen, Surg. Boone, 
leaving the shelter of a ravine, went forward onto 
the open field where there was no protection and despite the extreme enemy fire of all calibers, through 
a heavy mist of gas, applied dressings and first aid 
to wounded marines. This occurred southeast of Vierzy, near the cemetery, and on the road south from 
that town. When the dressings and supplies had been 
exhausted, he went through a heavy barrage of largecaliber shells, both high explosive and gas, to replenish these supplies, returning quickly with a sidecar 
load, and administered them in saving the lives of the 
wounded. A second trip, under the same conditions 
and for the same purpose, was made by Surg. Boone 
later that day. 4
In addition to earning the Medal of Honor, Boone 
was awarded the Army’s Distinguished Service Cross, 
multiple Silver Stars, and many other awards, making 
him among the most decorated military physicians 
in history. 5 With one of the most remarkable and distinguished careers in the history of the US military, 
Vice Admiral Boone demonstrated preparedness and 
readiness that led to courage and success when it really counted. He is an excellent example for all military 
physicians. 
THE PROBLEM AND NEED FOR TRAINING
With the exception of Special Operations units, no 
service officially requires physicians to become proficient or familiar with any combat skills, and military 
units often do not place any demands on the physician 
outside of medical tasks beyond the minimum military 
requirements. Special Operations units expect their 
physicians to have (from prior service) or to develop 
the ability to handle themselves in rapidly changing 
situations, including combat. Thus, the opportunity 
for these physicians to regularly train in combat skills 
with their unit members is expected. In all other units, 
pursuing training in these skills is the physician’s responsibility; it is often not provided by the unit. 
As a result, physicians may receive only a half-day 
of familiarization with a pistol, while the remainder 
of readiness preparation involves updating medical/
dental/immunizations requirements; ensuring their 
security clearance and ISOPREP (isolated personnel 
155
Tactical Field Skills for the Military Physician
report, a secure individual profile on file in case a 
person must be rescued and their identity verified) is 
up to date; and making sure various computer-based 
training is current. These kinds of activities, although 
important for deployment readiness, do not constitute 
tactical field skills preparation or adequately prepare 
the physician for working in a combat environment. 
The unit may facilitate scheduling combat arms training but not offer extra training such as combatives, land 
navigation, or small team tactics. 
Likewise, training as a physician does not include 
preparation for combat field medicine. Experienced 
combat-proven medics often know more about saving 
lives of wounded warfighters in the field than physicians. Medics are experts in Tactical Combat Casualty 
Care (TCCC),6 and it behooves the military physician to 
learn and be able to execute these standards as well as 
Advanced Trauma Life Support or Advanced Cardiac 
Life Support standards. However, medics will look 
to the unit physician for medical training, validation, 
and mentorship. The physician must have an in-depth 
understanding of TCCC principles and techniques 
to be able to communicate in a common language 
and utilize the same treatment algorithms when it is 
necessary to provide care under fire. Physicians need 
to train medics in TCCC-recommended medications 
for pain control and wound prophylaxis; medics have 
the know-how to administer medications but may 
not fully understand how they work or when certain 
medications may be better than another. It is important 
to practice how to care for casualties out of an aid bag, 
including in the dark. Practice improves performance 
not just individually, but also collectively between the 
tactical physician and medic. 
SHOOT
Weapons Training
In a combat zone, the physician is usually assigned 
a weapon, most often a pistol (M9) or possibly a rifle 
(M4). Even under almost all theater-established rules 
of engagement, medical personnel never lose the right 
to self-defense according to the Geneva Conventions. 
Rules of engagement vary with the threat level and 
phase of combat operations. For example, in the initial 
assault phase of a combat operation, a soldier may 
legally shoot any enemy holding a weapon, whereas 
in the stabilization phase of combat operations, the 
soldier may have to wait until that same enemy makes 
a threatening gesture before shots can be fired. By the 
Geneva Conventions, however, as medical personnel, 
physicians can shoot only if threatened and there is a 
need to protect their own life or the life of patients. 7 
In such cases, deadly force may be used. It is vitally 
important to understand such rules of engagement 
within the confines of the Geneva Conventions, and 
medical personnel must be ready to utilize deadly 
force when appropriate in order to be a force multiplier for the unit. Physicians should not be the cause 
of further casualties because of a lack of resolve or 
understanding of their role in combat.
There are reasons to be familiar with weapons and 
shooting other than self-defense and protecting patients. Chances are, firing a weapon is an activity at 
least some members of the unit do regularly as part of 
their job, and understanding the forces imparted to the 
body, both from recoil and from shooting positions, 
will help the physician more appropriately profile 
(impose medical duty limitations) to protect these 
patients while recovering from injury. Shooting also 
provides first-hand experience with the occupational 
noise exposure warfighters face, which emphasizes the 
importance of advocating for the funding and enforcement of appropriate hearing protection. In addition, 
shooting can be a significant source of occupational 
lead exposure, especially for personnel who routinely 
shoot in indoor ranges. The unit physician should 
track shooting-associated occupational concerns such 
as proper ventilation in firing ranges, hand-washing 
immediately after firing range operations, and blood 
lead level monitoring in populations that routinely fire 
assigned weapons. In addition, going to the range and 
firing weapons once or twice a year provides physicians an opportunity to get to know their patients in 
a nonclinical setting.
The ideal time to learn how to safely handle and 
employ firearms is before deployment; during deployment is too late to become comfortable with a weapon. 
Weapons may be assigned because of an increased 
threat level, and there is no time to become proficient 
with a weapon once an assault starts. Hospitals and 
aid stations are notoriously soft targets that enemies 
will exploit if given a chance. 
Physicians should seek weapons training and work 
through the chain of command to get more time on the 
firing range. Depending on the military service (Army, 
Navy, Marines, or Air Force) and the particular type of 
unit the physician is assigned to (conventional forces 
vs special operations), the method and ease of obtaining time on the shooting range will differ. However, 
all physicians should respect and be friendly with unit 
noncommissioned officers, who can be immensely 
helpful and have established lines of communication 
and trust with other units and agencies involved with 
156
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
scheduling training (see Chapter 12, Enlisted Service 
Members, for a more detailed explanation of the role 
of the enlisted corps). If the extra training cannot get 
scheduled or authorized through regular channels, 
physicians should take the initiative to go to a local 
shooting range, many of which are within driving 
distance from most military bases and can provide 
weapons and training in the fundamentals. Civilian 
9-mm pistols are similar to those most likely issued 
to officers during deployments. 
This chapter is not a resource on weapons safety. 
However, a few foundational concepts that should be 
understood by anyone who works around firearms are 
provided here. Regardless of whether one is a novice 
or expert with firearms, the following rules must never 
be modified or broken: 
 
1. Always treat the weapon as if it was loaded, 
and do not rely on a mechanical safety to keep 
the weapon safe.
 
2. Never point a weapon at anything other than 
the intended target.
 
3. Keep fingers off the trigger until ready to 
shoot.
 
4. Be sure of the target, what is around it, in 
front of it, and behind it.
Additionally, every time a firearm is held, the 
weapon must be inspected: is there a loaded magazine 
or a round of ammunition in the chamber (the chamber 
is where the round of ammunition lines up with the 
barrel for firing)? Physicians must be familiar with 
this procedure before accepting a weapon. There must 
be absolute certainty about the status of any weapon 
being held; a round of ammunition negligently fired 
can never be taken back, and the consequences can be 
permanent and tragic. There is never an acceptable 
excuse for a negligent discharge of a weapon. 
Although much can be learned about weapons 
handling and shooting from books and videos, it is 
a physical skill that must be executed to truly learn 
it. Dry firing, the act of going through the motions of 
shooting with a confirmed (and reconfirmed) empty 
weapon, does not hurt the weapon and is an excellent 
way to practice employing a firearm (the shot must 
still be performed in a safe direction). Specifically, 
dry firing can provide practice grasping the handle, 
using the weapons sights, establishing a smooth trigger squeeze (trigger “press”), and aiming in different 
firing positions (prone, sitting, kneeling, firing around 
barricades). In addition, magazine changes with empty 
magazines can be practiced. 
Sighting in or “zeroing” a weapon is the critical 
process of adjusting the weapon sights (iron sights or 
optics) so that the fired round impacts the intended 
target. The initial sight in or “zero” should be at close 
range (15 m or less for a pistol, 25 m for a rifle). Once 
the sights are grossly adjusted and there is a consistent shot grouping at close range, the process should 
be repeated at actual engagement ranges to further 
fine-tune the sighting (25 m for pistol, 200+ m for rifle). 
Additionally, shooting should be practiced while 
wearing assigned protective equipment. Firing a 
weapon while wearing a helmet and body armor is 
much different than without: sling length, holster 
position, and shooting positions will change. Ear and 
eye protection must also be worn, and eye protection 
may slightly alter the sight picture and negatively 
affect accuracy if the user is not looking through the 
center of the lenses. 
Physicians should clean their own weapon no matter what their rank or how busy their schedule is; this 
responsibility should never be delegated. There is 
much to be learned about a firearm from the cleaning 
process, and doing so will earn respect from soldiers 
who see this as a duty that should never be shirked. 
Combatives
Combatives (or hand-to-hand fighting) training is 
widely available on most military bases. Understanding the forces and stress on personnel undergoing combatives training is important for the military physician 
assigned to a combat unit. The best way to understand 
the forces involved in combatives training is by firsthand experience. During sparring, a “preposterone 
effect” can occur, in which the intensity increases to 
the point where sparring partners end up hurting each 
other. A military physician who works with combatives instructors is able to effectively collaborate and 
better protect unit members from unnecessary injury 
while undergoing this training. A physician does not 
need to become an expert fighter, but learning the basic 
skills helps the physician understand possible injuries 
from combatives, provides a modicum of physical 
confidence, and can be fun. 
MOVE
Principles of Navigation
It is critical to learn navigation by map and compass even in the global positioning system (GPS) era. 
This skill is still taught for several reasons, including 
the possibility of losing GPS access when fighting an 
enemy with advanced capabilities. For a decade, the 
Navy had stopped teaching midshipmen celestial 
157
Tactical Field Skills for the Military Physician
navigation, but as of 2016 it is back in the curriculum 
because of a reasonable assessment of the threat and 
potential vulnerability of US satellites. 8 Navigating 
with a map and compass is a basic soldiering skill, 
is reasonably easy to learn, and provides confidence 
when moving through rural areas for training or combat. It is a key step for many military schools, such as 
Ranger training, and in all combat arms training. 
There are many good books on navigation, both 
military and civilian. Navigation training does not 
require any special equipment, and is available at local 
orienteering or outdoor clubs if efforts to find military 
training come up short. Physicians should make every 
effort to participate when their unit conducts this training, including land navigation at night, which can be 
much more difficult and requires practice. Knowing 
how to read a contour map is also important; however, 
it is not as critical as being able to accurately locate 
oneself on a standard map. 
Nautical charts and maps use the universal system 
of latitude and longitude to describe a location on the 
globe. All maps are based on a model of the earth’s 
sphere called a “datum,” which incorporates a grid 
system, called a “projection,” which mathematically 
transforms the 3-dimensional sphere to a 2-dimensional map. Worldwide, there are many datum choices. Examples of common datums for US maps and charts are 
WGS-84 or NAD–83. When using coordinate systems 
such as latitude and longitude, or grid coordinates, 
it is necessary to know which datum the coordinates 
are based on. The error of the same coordinates in 
two different datums can be substantial, on the order 
of kilometers. 
A geocoding system founded in 2013, called “What3words,” has assigned three dictionary words to every 
3 × 3 m2 of the globe. 9 It is a simple way to locate any 
place on the planet; for example, a square at the foot 
of the Statue of Liberty is exactly described by the 
words “planet.inches.most.” Three words are much 
easier to remember than a 10-character alphanumeric, 
and much less likely to result in a transcription error. 
The three words can be translated into a GPS location 
(and vice versa), as well as driving instructions, with 
simple, free phone applications. The system is already 
being used in over 170 countries and its use is growing, 
especially in the developing world where many existing roads are not named or posted. While not currently 
used by the US military, it could be especially useful 
in large refugee camps without street addresses, or 
in humanitarian aid and disaster response missions. 
Driving Military Vehicles
Driver training and getting licensed for driving 
military vehicles is fairly easy, although physicians are 
not usually required to get these licenses. However, 
if the base is located in a cold climate, there may be 
mandatory cold weather driving and vehicle maintenance training; if overseas, there may be specific 
driving license testing requirements. Operational units 
and any military facility with a motor pool (a location 
where military vehicles are stored and maintained) 
have procedures for qualifying and licensing military 
personnel to drive military vehicles. Although guidelines establish priority to receive training, there are 
always opportunities to receive training by request 
(a recurring theme for most of the skills described in 
this chapter, which allow physicians to broaden skill 
sets and function in multiple capacities to be a force 
multiplier in combat settings). 
Convoy Operations
Medical personnel do not usually run convoy operations but may need to travel with a convoy to other 
locations within a combat zone. Convoys should not 
be joined without preparation. All participants must 
be prepared to respond to an attack, which requires 
practice. The convoy leader (who may not be the senior 
person in the convoy) should explain and rehearse the 
proper immediate response to an improvised explosive 
device (IED) and other types of ambush. Unit medics 
and physicians must know exactly where medical 
gear (litter, burn blanket, other blankets, additional 
aid bags, etc) is located within the convoy and inspect 
it prior to moving.
Convoy participants should also study the route to 
be taken; note significant terrain features (eg, which 
side of the big bend in the Tigris River the embassy 
is on); keep in mind the safest direction to travel in 
case of separation; and memorize any rendezvous 
points along the route. Many convoys carry a tracking device that sends a GPS signal to a secure satellite, 
which can be tracked by secure ground stations. Some 
of these tracking devices have an emergency switch; 
all participants should learn how this device works 
and how to activate any emergency beacon functions. 
The physician should know the MEDEVAC (medical 
evacuation) radio frequency, the frequency to the tactical operations center, and how to work the radio in the 
vehicle (see Communicate, below). Participants should 
know about any other countermeasures. 
Passengers should sit in the back seat on the driver’s 
side in countries that drive on the right side of the 
road (away from the side of the road where bombs 
might be buried), and wear proper protective equipment (helmet, body armor, eye protection). Electronic 
noise-cancelling hearing protection, if available, is also 
beneficial because even a single unprotected exposure 
to a very loud sound, such as a roadside IED detona158
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
tion, can permanently damage hearing. This equipment blocks loud and harmful sounds, such as gunfire 
or explosions, while allowing the wearer to hear faint 
sounds to maintain situational awareness. 
 
Passengers, even if qualified on the weapon, should 
stay out of the gun turret. Despite how nice it may feel 
to get fresh air and how exciting it may be to fire such 
a weapon, this is an unnecessary risk that puts the entire unit in jeopardy. In addition, filling such a combat 
role when not absolutely necessary jeopardizes one’s 
Geneva Convention status and may do irreparable 
harm to the mission due to unfavorable press coverage. 
When moving around a semi-permissive environment (one in which the host nation has only partial effective control of the territory) in civilian-style vehicles, 
soldiers should try to blend in as much as possible (eg, 
if the locals do not wear sunglasses, anyone wearing 
them would be marked as a foreigner). 
Personal Equipment and Moving
The concept of “layering” personal combat equipment must be understood. There are three basic layers 
of personal equipment:
 
1. The base layer is always worn and consists 
of the uniform itself; protective equipment 
(body armor, helmet, eye protection, ear 
protection, gloves, etc); the Individual First 
Aid Kit (IFAK), which includes bandaging, 
tourniquets, analgesics, and antibiotics; 
critical survival items kept in pockets (map, 
compass, knife, red-lens LED headlamp, fire 
starter, etc); and assigned weapon. 
 
2. The second layer is the “combat load,” consisting of items critical to the performance of 
the mission. It usually consists of ammunition, water, personal radio (if assigned), night 
optic device (if assigned), and in the case of 
the unit physician, the aid bag. 
 
3. The final layer is the sustainment load, carried in a rucksack and consisting of items 
needed for the length of the mission. For a 
multiday mission, these items include additional water, food, additional ammunition, 
batteries, climate-appropriate clothing and 
foul-weather gear, sleeping bag with ground 
pad, hygiene items, and other items as the 
mission dictates. 
The IFAK should be carried at all times in the location specified by the unit’s standard operating procedure. This allows everyone on the convoy to know 
where to rapidly find the critical first aid supplies if a 
soldier is wounded. Common practice is to use supplies from the wounded soldier’s IFAK first, and then 
use supplies from other IFAKs only if needed. 
If movement occurs in the dark of night, helmetmountable night optic devices (NODs) should be used 
if available (the term “night vision goggles” should 
not be used because many common NODs, such as the 
PVS-14, are monocular and not a goggle). If a NOD 
is available, the correct mount and bracket to attach 
the NOD to the assigned helmet must be confirmed 
and the physician will need to practice with it. In case 
the physician is the only one uninjured to drive the 
vehicle, he or she should also practice driving with 
NODs.
COMMUNICATE
Understanding the basics of military communications is a foundational skill that all military members 
should grasp, including physicians. This skill is needed 
to call for a MEDEVAC, to call for help, and to talk with 
the search and rescue aircraft when forced to escape and 
evade. Communications equipment is often encrypted, 
so it is important to have a basic understanding of 
handling cryptologic material. All communications 
methods can fail, sometimes at critical times, so familiarity with the communications plan that outlines the 
multiple redundant communications systems is useful. 
The “PACE” (Primary, Alternate, Contingency, 
Emergency) mnemonic is often used in military communications plans; for example: 
 
• Primary–VHF (very high frequency) military 
radio 
 
• Alternate–satellite phone 
 
• Contingency–cell phones 
 
• Emergency–send a runner 
It is vitally important that all members of a unit, 
including the physician, be familiar with the plan and 
know the proper frequencies and numbers necessary 
to use the equipment. The unit cannot rely on just a 
few members who are considered responsible for the 
radio. The unit physician may have to use the radio 
because the warfighters who are supposed to use it are 
either incapacitated or actively engaging the enemy. 
Military radios are called transceivers, which is a 
combination of a transmitter (which sends signals) and 
a receiver (which reads incoming signals). Transceivers 
use different frequencies of electromagnetic waves, and 
these frequencies are artificially grouped into named 
bandwidths. The details on the various bandwidths 
are listed in Exhibit 10-1. 
159
Tactical Field Skills for the Military Physician
EXHIBIT 10-1
RADIO FREQUENCY TYPES
 
• UHF (ultra high frequency), 300–3,000 MHz. Used for line-of-sight communication with aircraft and for satellite communications. Because of its relatively dense frequency, UHF can carry a relatively large amount of 
data for a given bandwidth. UHF has good short-range penetration and is good for communications inside 
buildings and structures; however, it has limited range for most ground-to-ground communications and is 
rarely used for this purpose. Obstacles on the ground more rapidly attenuate UHF than lower frequencies.
 
• VHF (very high frequency), 30–300 MHz. In the military, VHF is used primarily in ground-to-ground communications, but may be used in military aircraft to communicate with ground-based troops. VHF is the same 
range used by commercial radio stations. The voice (or data) information is embedded in a carrier frequency 
by a technique called “frequency modulation,” or FM. As a result, VHF communications are often referred 
to by the alphanumeric term “Fox Mike” (for FM). Military radios may use a frequency-hopping capability 
to attempt to foil an enemy from either listening in or using direction-finding equipment to locate the unit. 
Frequency-hopping radios in communication with each other must be synchronized on the same algorithm 
(otherwise, communications are impossible); in an emergency, synchronization can be complicated if the user 
is not familiar with the radio’s operation. Operators should know how to take the radio out of frequency hopping mode and establish communications (“get up”) on the MEDEVAC frequency. VHF is generally useful 
for line-of-sight communications with a maximum range roughly determined by the height of the antenna, 
curvature of the earth, and power output, with a common maximum range of 30 miles in clear terrain, and a 
minimum range of 1 mile or less in dense jungle.
 
• HF (high frequency), 3–30 MHz. Also known as “shortwave radio,” HF used to be a staple of military long-range 
communications because it has a potential global reach, but it has largely been replaced by satellite communications. When higher-frequency transmissions reach the ionosphere, they keep going (which is why UHF is 
useful to communicate with satellites). Under the right circumstances, HF waves could be refracted (bent) by 
the ionosphere back to earth, potentially sending the signal around the world. HF communications are heavily 
dependent on time of day, frequency, atmospheric and sun spot activity, antenna configuration, and power 
output of the transmitter. These factors make HF communications less reliable for military communications. 
However, the vulnerability of satellites to electro-magnetic pulse radiation may bring HF communications 
back into more common use in the military. Like all communications, HF signals can be encrypted, and they 
can be sent in dense brief bursts of data. “Burst” transmissions (versus “voice transmissions”) dramatically 
reduce the time a potential enemy has to use direction-finding equipment.
“Radio discipline” is exemplified by clear and succinct transmissions, sent only when appropriate. Radio 
discipline implies using the assigned radio channel (or 
“net”) only when there is something important to say, 
and interfering with an ongoing transmission only in 
an emergency. If a unit is under attack, communication 
often starts with a phrase such as, “emergency, troops 
in contact.” This tells everyone on the radio network 
cease nonemergency communication and prepare to 
provide assistance. If those listening are unable to help, 
they remain quiet and off the network while others 
who are able to assist (eg, a reaction force, close air 
support, or MEDEVAC personnel) can communicate.
Radio discipline also means knowing when to use 
standardized formats, such as calling in MEDEVAC 
or close air support. Exhibit 10-2 is an example of a 
standard 9-line MEDEVAC format. A 9-line request 
card should be carried by all service members in a 
combat zone to use as reference. Executing the request 
properly will prevent unnecessary delays that could 
lead to worsened patient outcomes. Utilizing the “9line” in checklist fashion helps ensure all necessary 
items, such as hoists, other extraction equipment, or 
specific medical equipment are requested (memorizing 
the 9-line MEDEVAC request should not be relied on).
Cryptologic material encodes and decodes communications. Because radios are designed to talk to each 
other, they all run the same codes (or “fill”) on any given 
day. This means the loss or misplacement of cryptologic 
material renders the entire global US military communications system vulnerable. Mishandling cryptologic 
materials is a significant mistake with serious and lasting consequences. It is absolutely imperative that lost 
or suspected loss of cryptologic material is immediately 
reported to the chain of command. Proper handling of 
cryptologic material is similar to handling narcotics: 
they must be kept in an approved safe and exactly 
accounted for on a permanent record. Most military 
radios have encryption capability. How to “zero-out” or 
“dump” (permanently delete) the cryptologic material 
on the radio to prevent it from falling into enemy hands 
is another skill the physician should learn. 
160
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 10-2
9-LINE MEDEVAC REQUEST
Line 1. Location of the pick-up site.
Line 2. Radio frequency, call sign, and suffix.
Line 3. Number of patients by precedence.
A: Urgent
B: Urgent surgical
C: Priority
D: Routine
E: Convenience
Line 4. Special equipment required. 
A: None
B: Hoist
C: Extraction equipment
D: Ventilator
Line 5. Number of patients.
A: Litter
B: Ambulatory
Line 6. Security at pick-up site.* 
N: No enemy troops in area
P: Possible enemy troops in area (approach with caution)
E: Enemy troops in area (approach with 
caution)
X: Enemy troops in area (armed escort 
required)
*In peacetime, list instead number and types of wounds, 
injuries, and illnesses.
Line 7. Method of marking pick-up site. 
A: Panels
B: Pyrotechnic signal
C: Smoke signal
D: None
E: Other
Line 8. Patient nationality and status. 
A: US Military
B: US Civilian
C: Non-US Military
D: Non-US Civilian
E: Enemy Prisoner of War 
Line 9. NBC contamination.*
N: Nuclear
B: Biological
C: Chemical
*In peacetime, instead provide terrain description of 
pick-up site.
Portable satellite communications may be conducted 
with an encrypted UHF (ultra-high frequency) radio 
transceiver and a small directional antenna. The antenna must be pointed roughly at the satellite’s location 
in space, meaning the antenna is pointed on the correct 
compass bearing and azimuth (angle above the ground, 
with 90° pointing straight up and 0° pointing at the 
horizon). Most communications satellites used by the 
military are in geosynchronous orbits, meaning they 
stay in the same part of the sky relative to the earth as 
it spins. These satellites may only be available during 
certain time windows. The radio must be on the correctly assigned frequencies for sending and receiving, 
with the correct cryptologic material fill. With the right 
frequency, fill, and time period, satellite communications are usually the most reliable form of long-distance 
communication. “Long-distance” is defined as any 
distance longer than ground-based VHF radios can 
reliably communicate. One potential disadvantage of 
satellite communications is that unless the unit also has 
a specialized antenna for use on a moving vehicle, the 
vehicle must stop so that the antenna can be pointed 
in the correct direction and elevation to communicate. 
Relying on mobile phones as the primary or only 
means of communication is a poor plan. Even if it 
works well in one location on a particular day, it may 
not work when and where it is needed. When a mobile phone must be used, do not use a personal phone 
unless it is a true emergency (and part of the PACE 
plan as described above). A mobile phone may work 
in one country but fail when the border is crossed into 
a neighboring country. Country code dialing prefixes 
for all surrounding countries in the area of operation 
should be known. Other practical tips that are easy 
to forget include having the correct plug adapters for 
charging cables and carrying extra batteries or power 
supplies to recharge batteries. In many developing 
countries, mobile phone networks are unreliable during high-use time periods, and dead zones are common 
and large. If a voice phone call does not go through, 
sometimes text messages will go through. 
Satellite phones, however, do not rely on local cellular networks. They directly communicate with a 
constellation of satellites that provide global coverage. 
They are a reasonable alternative plan for communications, but must be routinely tested in locations where 
they may be needed. Satellite phones that have not 
been tested cannot be relied on; they may work intermittently; and batteries may die at inopportune times. 
Units should also ensure there is time on the service 
contract to cover the period of anticipated use plus at 
least 2 months. No matter the type of communications 
device being used, if it is not encrypted, users must not 
talk about, or around, classified topics.
161
Tactical Field Skills for the Military Physician
ADDITIONAL OPERATIONAL MEDICAL TRAINING
In addition to being a physician assigned to a combat 
unit or special operations unit, there are unique operational medical billets that include training as a flight 
surgeon (FS) or a dive medical officer (DMO) in the Army 
or as an undersea medical officer (UMO) in the Navy. 
Flight Medicine
Becoming an FS takes between 6 weeks (Army and 
Air Force) and 6 months (Navy). The reason the Navy’s 
program is so much longer is because the Navy FS 
training program includes actual flight training up to 
the point of solo flight, while the Army and Air Force 
programs provide only orientation and familiarization 
flights, not individual flight training. The term “surgeon” is a holdover from the days when all military 
physicians were considered “field surgeons.” FSs learn 
the physiological effects of flight and atmosphere as well 
as the medical administrative requirements for safely 
providing medical care to aviation personnel. FSs are 
required to fly as a crew member a minimum of 4 hours 
a month while in flight status in order to better understand the patient population and their occupational hazards. Similar to a unit physician assigned to an airborne 
unit who is expected to have parachuting experience, an 
FS is expected to understand the nuances of the world 
of military aviation. FSs also perform medical services 
for military freefall parachute jumpers and drone pilots.
A major challenge faced by the FS is balancing the 
needs and requests of individual aviators with the 
needs of the team and mission. An FS must maintain 
confidentiality with individual aviators, but must also 
have the authority to ground any aviators when their 
medical condition may compromise flight safety or 
mission success. This may involve being available to 
the flying unit at all times for consultation, as well as 
coordinating medical care with specialists in a timely 
manner to get the grounded aviator back to flying status as soon as possible. Being part of the team, while 
maintaining a proper professionalism to make tough 
calls, can be difficult. These situations can be managed 
most effectively when the unit’s aviation personnel 
know and trust their FS as a person and as a physician. 
This rapport comes most easily if the FS regularly flies 
with the crew and spends time with the unit, even in 
non-work situations. The more time an FS spends with 
the unit, the more trust and respect he or she will earn, 
and the FS’s ability to effectively care for the unit and 
enhance mission-readiness will be multiplied. 
Dive Medicine
Army DMOs and Navy UMOs are also specialized operational medical billets. Both are trained as 
military divers, which is academically and physically 
very rigorous. A DMO is limited to the care of military 
undersea divers, while the UMO is also responsible for 
the medical requirements and medical hazards unique 
to submariners. Training to become a DMO takes 9 
weeks and is conducted by the Navy. Training to become a UMO takes a total of 22 weeks in three phases. 10 
Both DMOs and UMOs are experts in the recognition 
and treatment of diving casualties, including the use 
of recompression protocols in hyperbaric chambers. 
Airborne
Some assignments include an opportunity to attend 
airborne training. Physicians assigned to an airborne unit 
are expected to have parachute wings. If they are not already earned, the unit will send the physician to airborne 
training. Again, this training is a fairly intense shared 
experience and an opportunity to build rapport, which is 
critical to earning the unit’s trust and respect, and being 
an effective unit physician. Experience with parachuting 
helps a physician understand the unit’s various medical 
issues and assess its overall health and readiness. 
Survival, Evasion, Resistance, Escape
Training in survival, evasion, resistance, and escape 
(SERE) is vital for military physicians. SERE training 
teaches vital strategies for staying alive if captured 
by the enemy. When groups of service members are 
captured, the captors will exploit the weakest link, and 
those who have not had SERE training are more likely 
to succumb. The training is unpleasant at times, but the 
payoff is more than worth the temporary discomfort. 
If at all possible, enrollment in SERE training should 
be pursued by military medical providers. 
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Military Bearing
In operational units, active duty service members 
judge the physician by his or her military bearing and 
appearance. Despite other qualifications, physicians 
who do not meet weight standards or wear the uniform 
properly lose credibility. Simple keys to success include 
staying physically fit, wearing the uniform correctly, 
162
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
keeping hair in regulation, and learning how to give a 
crisp salute. These simple actions will pay dividends 
in training opportunities and building respect. 
Medical Evacuation and Mass Casualty Planning 
and Training
Regardless of whether the physician arrives at a new 
or established deployment location, there are several 
critical tasks he or she must accomplish. MEDEVAC 
plans must be confirmed, clinic supplies must be 
checked, a mass casualty (MASCAL) plan must be 
ready, and the casualty collection points must be 
stocked and ready for use. The physician must never 
fully rely on anyone else to do these tasks, and should 
not rest until they are done. 
Within a week or so of arrival, the physician should 
insist on a full live rehearsal of the MEDEVAC plan. 
MASCAL lockers at the casualty collection points should 
be well stocked with TCCC-approved medical supplies. 
Well-organized plans to triage, mark, and track casualties, as well as treat multiple casualties at night in foul 
(or hot) weather is critical. In addition, expansion plans 
utilizing buildings of opportunity or putting up additional tents must be considered if tactically appropriate.
Reliably receiving medical supplies in a timely manner can be notoriously difficult in a combat setting, so 
the physician must understand how medical supplies 
(Class VIII) are ordered and how long it takes to receive 
them. A good starting plan is to arrive with enough 
supplies to last at least twice as long as the typical 
logistics chain timeframe without resupply. 
Preventive Medicine
Field sanitation and preventive medicine are vital 
to the health and readiness of the unit. The unit physician oversees unit preventive medicine assets and must 
ensure that adequate preventive medicine measures 
are in place. He or she is responsible for maintaining 
acceptable, approved methods of procuring clean water, adequate hand-washing stations, vector control 
measures, and latrine and shower facilities, both for 
enhancing unit morale and, more importantly, for 
controlling disease rates. Throughout history, unit 
effectiveness has been harmed more by disease and 
nonbattle injuries than from conflict-inflicted injuries. 
It is vital for the unit physician perform this role effectively (see Chapters 16 and 40). 
Operational and Intelligence Briefings
The physician must understand what the unit’s 
objective and mission are and where they will take 
place. To be effective in a combat environment and 
thus a force multiplier, the physician must understand 
the mission to anticipate the medical threats to the 
unit. Thus, the physician should request operational 
briefings from the operations section of the unit to 
develop a proper situational awareness. If possible, 
the physician should see where the troops are living, 
especially if they are remotely located. Food safety 
must be assessed (actually a military public health officer responsibility, but the physician has overlapping 
responsibilities), as well as water safety, sanitation, and 
force protection measures such as ensuring warfighters 
are taking proper precautions to protect themselves 
from vector-borne illnesses (eg, antimalarials). The 
physician is responsible for performing these tasks 
without direction from command. The physician is 
the subject matter expert and must bring any concerns 
found during these inspections to the unit commander.
In addition to receiving briefings from operations, the physician should seek a briefing from the 
intelligence section for information about the enemy 
situation. Similar to the operational environment, the 
intelligence environment and threats must be understood by the physician, at least in broad strokes. For 
example, understanding how realistic it is for chemical, 
biological, radiological, nuclear, or explosive (CBRNE) 
weapons to be used by the enemy will greatly enhance 
the physician’s preparations for what kind of casualties 
may be expected. The CBRNE threat is real, and it is 
better to be prepared for the worst scenario. Intelligence 
personnel will help the physician increase situational 
awareness within the confines of security clearances. 
Time Management
Although physicians should seek combat training 
as described in this chapter, their primary duty is to 
be an outstanding physician. The unit physician must 
be mindful of impressions (eg, if the physician is out 
of the clinic too often going to the shooting on the 
range, it may cause resentment from colleagues who 
may have to cover clinic duties). The unit physician 
must learn how to balance personal injury risk from 
combat training activities, time outside the clinic, and 
maintaining clinical proficiency to perform the primary 
task as the unit’s medical expert. During training as 
well as at deployed locations, the physician should 
be willing to help load pallets, put blast blankets over 
windows, help fill sand bags, and perform other unit 
tasks. In this way other unit members will accept the 
physician as a team member, working toward the same 
mission goals. This earned respect will pay dividends 
by the warfighters who will look out for their physician 
in ways that cannot be easily articulated. 
163
Tactical Field Skills for the Military Physician
SUMMARY
To be an effective military physician and a force 
multiplier by supporting the warfighters in the combat 
unit, medical officers must take the initiative to learn 
tactical field skills. It is not enough to be a good physician. Military physicians must know the warfighters 
and their mission, and they must learn to shoot, move, 
and communicate effectively. Physicians must balance 
this training with their primary role as the unit medical 
officer. During deployment, the physician is ultimately 
responsible for casualties, and even experienced medics will look to them for guidance and leadership, 
whether or not the physician has tactical experience. 
At all times, physicians must prepare for and respond 
to threats to the unit’s health and readiness. To be 
most effective, they must employ both medical and 
tactical training. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Geneva Convention I, articles 24–26.
 
2. Geneva Convention II, article 36.
 
3. Geneva Convention IV, article 20.
 
4. Congressional Medal of Honor Society. Boone, Joel Thompson. http://www.cmohs.org/recipient-detail/2506/boonejoel-thompson.php#. Accessed May 30, 2017.
 
5. The US Navy Memorial. Joel Thompson Boone. http://navylog.navymemorial.org/boone-joel. Accessed May 30, 2017. 
 
6. Committee on Tactical Combat Casualty Care. PHTLS (Prehospital Trauma Life Support), Military. 8th ed. Burlington, 
MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2016: 655–850.
 
7. Geneva Convention I, article 22. 
 
8. Peterson A. Why Naval Academy students are learning to sail by the stars in the first time in a decade. Washington 
Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2016/02/17/why-naval-academy-students-are-learningto-sail-by-the-stars-for-the-first-time-in-a-decade/?utm_term=.ebee5a6caea0. Published February 17, 2016. Accessed 
August 28, 2018.
 
9. what3words website. https://what3words.com. Accessed August 28, 2018. 
 10. Navy Medicine Operational Training Center website. http://www.med.navy.mil/sites/nmotc/numi/Pages/default.
aspx. Accessed August 28, 2018. 
164
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
