585
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
Chapter 38
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY IN THE 
MILITARY
RENEE PAZDAN, MD*; THERESA LATTIMORE, MSN†; EDWARD WHITT, MS‡; and JAMIE GRIMES, MD§
INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND SCOPE 
DEMOGRAPHICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Department of Defense Definition of Traumatic Brain Injury
Severity Range: Mild, Moderate, Severe, and Penetrating 
Defining Postinjury Periods
Military Incidence by Numbers, Severity, and Service 
Incidence Among Civilians
MANAGEMENT IN DEPLOYED SETTINGS
Concussion Management in the Deployed Setting
Traumatic Brain Injury With Polytrauma
CONCUSSION MANAGEMENT IN NONDEPLOYED SETTINGS
Algorithms for Garrison Concussion Management
Return to Play: High School, College, and State Requirements
Progressive Return to Activity
MANAGEMENT OF POSTCONCUSSIVE SYMPTOMS
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Concussion/Mild Traumatic 
Brain Injury 
Patient-Centered Care
Assessments for Common Postconcussive Symptoms
Neuroimaging Beyond the Immediate Period
RESEARCH AND FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS
SUMMARY
*Captain, US Public Health Service; Director of Traumatic Brain Injury, Warrior Recovery Center, Fort Carson, Colorado
†Director, Army Traumatic Brain Injury Program, US Army Office of The Surgeon General, Falls Church, Virginia
‡Master Sergeant (Retired), US Army; Senior Health Policy Analyst, Defense Health Agency, Falls Church, Virginia
§Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army; Chair, Neurology Department, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
586
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) sustained in battle was 
described as early as Homer’s Iliad, written approximately 3,000 years ago, before the Hippocratic era. 1 
Homer is believed to have discussed at least 147 neurological injuries in the Iliad, of which 78% were fatal, 
ranging from lethal penetrating brain injury to fully 
survivable events such as concussion and syncope. 1 
TBI remains a significant issue in modern warfare, 
with frequent diagnosis in both combat and training 
environments. The primary concerns for operational 
forces are the acute management of symptoms, impact 
on warfighting tasks, and susceptibility to secondary 
injury. Additionally, because of the logistical challenges associated with management of any injury or 
disease in an operational environment, the military 
continues to invest in improving the state of the science 
and delivering optimized TBI care in a modular and 
scalable fashion. The Department of Defense (DoD) 
requires “Readiness of the Force,” which relies on prevention of TBI, early and effective clinical management, 
and constant pursuit of advances in understanding and 
treating the condition. 
BACKGROUND AND SCOPE 
The DoD’s Defense and Veterans Brain Injury Center (DVBIC) tracks and reports the number of active 
duty service members (SMs) worldwide who sustain 
a TBI for the first time. Tracking began in 2000 and 
continues, with an overall annual peak incidence in 
2011 at 32,829. Numbers have declined since then, 
with the most recent annual incidence of 17,707 in 
2017. In total, from 2000 through 2017, at least 379,519 
TBIs were sustained by active duty, guard, and reserve 
members of the armed forces. 2 
DoD Instruction 6490. 11, DoD Policy Guidance for 
Management of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury/Concussion in the Deployed Setting,3 published in 2012, and 
updated in 2018, provided unified guidelines to all 
the services for management of mild TBI in the deployed setting. Previously, the DoD relied on SMs to 
report symptoms; with this policy, the DoD shifted to 
event-based reporting instead of patient-based presentation for evaluation of concussion. The DoD now 
uses event-driven protocols to maximize the chances 
of identifying a TBI or a potential TBI. No longer does 
the SM need to self-identify as having symptoms; 
rather, if an event is deemed potentially concussive, 
a medical evaluation is mandated (Exhibit 38-1). The 
Military Acute Concussion Evaluation (MACE), selected as a screening tool, provides guided questions 
to determine whether or not a concussion occurred. 
While the requirement for a potentially concussive 
event (PCE), or the role of policy to mandate concussion evaluation, could change in the future, the goal is 
to build systems that do not rely on self-identification 
by the SM.
DEMOGRAPHICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Department of Defense Definition of Traumatic 
Brain Injury 
In 2007, the DoD published a definition and injury 
stratification for TBI that was consistent with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National 
Institutes of Health, and the World Health Organization. This memorandum was updated and re-signed 
by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs in 2015. 4 As data rapidly emerges from the TBI 
research portfolio, most groups are considering new 
ways to define and stratify TBI. However, the current 
DoD definition of TBI is as follows: “A traumatically 
induced structural injury or physiological disruption 
of brain function, as a result of an external force, that 
is indicated by new onset or worsening of at least one 
of the following clinical signs immediately following 
the event: 
 
1. any period of loss, or a decreased level, of 
consciousness;
 
2. any loss of memory for events immediately 
before or after the injury (posttraumatic amnesia);
 
3. any alteration in mental state at the time of the 
injury (eg, confusion, disorientation, slowed 
thinking, alteration of consciousness/mental 
state).”4
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline5 (CPG) includes the above and 
the following two items:
 
4. neurological deficits (eg, weakness, loss of 
balance, change in vision, praxis, paresis/
plegia, sensory loss, aphasia) that may or may 
not be transient; or
 
5. intracranial lesion.
The definitions also say that, among other external 
forces, a blast or explosion may be considered a cause 
of TBI. 
587
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
EXHIBIT 38-1
MANDATORY REPORTING FOR POTENTIALLY CONCUSSIVE EVENTS 
Events Requiring Concussion Evaluation
• Involvement in a vehicle collision or rollover.
• A blow to the head during activities such as 
training, sporting/recreational activities, or combatives.
• Within 50 meters of a blast (inside or outside).
Command-Directed (Examples) 
• Repeated exposures to the events listed above.
• In accordance with protocols for environmental 
sensors (eg, helmet sensor, blast gauge). 
Severity Range: Mild, Moderate, Severe, 
Penetrating
Severity of TBI, per the DoD definition, is determined by the presence and duration of an altered state, 
which can include alteration of consciousness, loss of 
consciousness, or posttraumatic amnesia at the time of 
injury (Table 38-1). In the DoD definition, concussion is 
synonymous with mild TBI; these terms will be used 
interchangeably in this chapter. It should be noted 
that mild TBI can in some cases result in significant 
persistent symptoms and functional impairment, despite having the “mild” label. While penetrating head 
injury can be readily categorized as such by physical 
examination, closed head injury can be subtler, and 
severity categories are further defined by the parameters in Table 38-1.
Defining Postinjury Periods 
There is variability in the literature about timing 
and definitions after head injury. The VA/DoD CPG5 
for mild TBI uses the following stages, based upon 
work group consensus. These definitions will be used 
throughout this chapter: 
 
• Immediate period: 0 to 7 days postinjury.
 
• Acute period: 1 to 6 weeks postinjury.
 
• Post-acute period: 7 to 12 weeks postinjury.
 
• Chronic: more than 12 weeks postinjury.
Of note, the Berlin consensus statement on concussion in sport (see discussion below) uses different 
terminology, as well as different time frames—namely, 
the use of the term “persistent symptoms,” defined as 
the period beyond which normal clinical recovery is 
expected, and identified as over 10 to 14 days in adults 
and over 4 weeks in children. 6 This re-characterization 
of acute and post-acute concussion with a shorter 
timeline, as described in the Berlin consensus statement, is consistent with the direction that the DoD 
and many other groups are moving toward. For the 
DoD, this shift toward shorter timelines first appeared 
in the 2014 clinical recommendation on progressive 
return to activity,7 with timelines that deviated from 
DoD Instruction 6490. 11. 3 When reviewing literature 
on concussion, it is therefore imperative to be aware 
of how TBI, severity levels, and duration of postconcussion symptoms are defined, and that this aspect 
of concussion characterization is evolving rapidly 
based on emerging science. 8 Greater standardization 
of definitions and terminology over time will not only 
improve communication about direct patient care, 
but also allow research to move forward in a more 
synchronized fashion.
Military Incidence by Numbers, Severity, and 
Service 
The vast majority of TBI in the military, as in the 
civilian setting, is mild TBI (concussion), and as of 
February 2017 accounted for 85. 9% of TBI in the DoD 
(Table 38-2). Although incidence has some correlation 
TABLE 38-1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY SEVERITY CRITERIA
Mild/Concussion
Moderate
Severe
CT scan
Normal (CT is not indicated 
for most mild TBI patients)
Normal or abnormal structural imaging
Normal or abnormal structural imaging
Loss of consciousness
0–30 minutes
>30 minutes and <24 hours
> 24 hours
Alteration of consciousness
A moment–24 hours
>24 hours (if >24 hours, severity is based on other criteria)
Posttraumatic amnesia
0–1 day
>1 day < 7 days
> 7 days
CT: computed tomography; TBI: traumatic brain injury
588
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 38-2
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE WORLDWIDE TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY NUMBERS, 
2000–2016 
Severity
Air Force
Army
Marine 
Corps
Navy
Total
Penetrating
560
3,119
766
620
5,065
Severe
439
2,251
627
453
3,770
Moderate
4,370
18,060
5,396
5,125
32,951
Mild 
42,167
172,366
42,643
40,302
297,478
Not classifiable
1,602
15,632
2,127
2,467
21,828
Total
49,138
211,428
51,559
48,967
361,092
Data source: Defense and Veterans Brain Injury Center.
with operational tempo and troop volume, including 
the 2011 peak, TBI diagnoses have not returned to the 
numbers seen before Operations Enduring Freedom 
and Iraqi Freedom. 3 This may be indicative of not just 
an increased rate, or higher risk exposures, but also of 
increased awareness by patients and clinical providers in conjunction with the mandatory DoD reporting 
requirements. However, these composite numbers do 
not tell the full story because each SM is counted in the 
surveillance data only once per lifetime, which likely 
results in some level of underreporting of TBIs within 
the DoD. Further, the often mentioned ratio of 80% 
of DoD TBIs occurring in the nondeployed (garrison) 
environment is based on the assumption that the injury 
occurred where and when the diagnosis was made. 
This likely skews data toward more injuries occurring 
in garrison than in the combat environment, despite 
the surveillance methodology that counts diagnoses 
made within 30 days of a deployment as occurring 
during deployment. 
Regasa et al reported that prior studies indicated 
a TBI rate during deployment ranging from 12% to 
22. 8%. 9 However, the researchers went on to demonstrate that analysis of the data showed SMs were 8. 4 
times as likely to be diagnosed with a TBI in the 4 
weeks after deployment as compared to predeployment. 7 The risk decreased over the next 40 weeks, then 
leveled off at 1. 7 times the predeployment rate. This 
correlation is not causal, and the authors note it could 
result from underreporting in theater or increased 
injury rates for unknown reasons after deployment. 
Another analysis of military TBI data from the Armed 
Forces Health Surveillance Branch, published in the 
Medical Surveillance Monthly Report (MSMR),10 
divided TBI diagnoses by occurrence (prior to, during, or after deployment) and found that injury rates 
during deployment were 1. 5 times that of predeployment, and 1. 2 times that of the postdeployment group. 
This data is consistent with the work of Regasa et al, 
showing an increased prevalence both during and 
after deployment. The MSMR article further showed 
that combat-specific and armor/motor transport occupations had a higher postdeployment prevalence 
than other jobs when compared to predeployment. 
It is important to note that diagnoses in the 4 weeks 
after redeployment coincide with mandatory screening 
and may represent increased recognition of the injury 
rather than increased incidence. Additional research is 
needed to better understand the timing and location 
of these injuries. 
Incidence Among Civilians
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
estimates that from 2002 to 2006, TBI caused 1,365,000 
emergency department visits, 275,000 hospitalizations, 
and 52,000 deaths. 11 However, it also reports that only 
1 in 9 concussions are believed to be captured by typical surveillance methods. Falls represented the highest 
percentage (35. 2%) of external cause of injury in the 
general population in this time period. Motor vehicle 
injuries were the most common cause of TBI-related 
deaths, with the greatest numbers occurring in those 
aged 20 to 24. Also noted in this time period was a 62% 
increase in fall-related TBIs among children seen by 
emergency departments. This data might represent 
influences such as public awareness that were also 
represented in the DoD data. 
589
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
MANAGEMENT IN DEPLOYED SETTINGS
Concussion Management in the Deployed Setting
This section will focus on the challenges of managing concussion, especially with growing awareness 
of the complexity and evolving nature of TBI in the 
acute period. Moderate, severe, and penetrating TBIs 
are managed in accordance with protocols defined by 
Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) clinical practice 
algorithms (discussed later in this chapter). An emerging concept in the immediate/acute assessment of concussion is understanding the neurometabolic cascade 
and its manifestation in multiple domains, including 
cognitive, vestibular, and oculomotor. However, the 
timing of metabolic demand and injury/recovery 
curves within the brain are not fully understood. As 
described in 2014 by Giza et al,12 the neurometabolic 
cascade is a complex process of ionic, metabolic, and 
physiologic events, including an acute outpour of K+ 
and influx of Ca++, with drops in glucose and cerebral 
blood flow, leading to altered neurotransmitters and 
glutamate, and chronic pathophysiology with axonal 
injury, inflammation, and toxic accumulations. 
Consequently, multiple domains must be tested, 
and evaluations must be repeated after the brain is 
provided an opportunity to rest. In the military, this 
challenge is met through a combination of concussion 
management algorithms. A medical staff member may 
initiate the assessment, or per DoD policy, operational 
commanders may be required to refer an SM who was 
exposed to a PCE (see Exhibit 38-1). The algorithms 
start with “red flag” signs and symptoms (Exhibit 382). Separate red flags geared toward combat medics or 
corpsmen, rather than to providers, allow for a lower 
threshold for consultation or evacuation. Surveillance 
for these red flags is conducted secondary to TCCC 
protocols and may lead to provider consultation or 
hospital transport. Importantly, the DoD has invested 
in capabilities for point-of-injury assessment and monitoring (discussed further in the research section of this 
chapter). At the provider level, the red flags define the 
need for neuroimaging (noncontrast head computed 
tomography [CT] in the immediate injury period) or 
referral to specialty services. 
If there are no red flags, the MACE is initiated 
(Figure 38-1). The MACE is a standardized screening 
and assessment document performed on all SMs who 
experienced a PCE, with a section for a scripted history of the event. This section of the MACE is critical 
not only for documentation within the health record, 
but also for the SM’s records as he or she transitions 
from active duty service. As discussed earlier, accurate 
EXHIBIT 38-2
RED FLAGS FOR TRAUMATIC BRAIN 
INJURY AS LISTED IN DEPARTMENT OF 
DEFENSE CLINICAL MANAGEMENT 
ALGORITHMS 
Red flags for TBI are different at the corpsman/medic level than provider level, with a lower threshold 
for consultation or evacuation.
Corpsman/Combat Medic Red Flags
 
• Loss of consciousness 
 
• ≥ 2 potentially concussive events within 72 
hours
 
• Unusual or combative behavior
 
• Unequal pupils
 
• Seizures
 
• Repeated vomiting
 
• Double vision/loss of vision
 
• Worsening headache
 
• Weakness on one side of the body
 
• Unable to recognize people/disoriented to 
place
 
• Abnormal speech
Provider Red Flags
 
• Progressively declining level of consciousness
 
• Progressively declining neurological status
 
• Pupillary asymmetry
 
• Seizures
 
• Repeated vomiting
 
• Clinically verified GCS <15
 
• Neurological deficit: motor or sensory LOC 
>5 minutes
 
• Double vision
 
• Worsening headache
 
• Cannot recognize people or disoriented to 
place
 
• Slurred speech
 
• Unusual behavior
GCS: Glasgow Coma Scale
LOC: loss of consciousness
TBI: traumatic brain injury
entry into the electronic health record using the most 
current International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 
code is also important for maintaining good surveillance data. If the MACE determines that a concussive 
event occurred, then the additional sections are com590
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 38-1. Military Acute Concussion Evaluation pocket 
card.
Reproduced from: https://dvbic.dcoe.mil/material/macemilitary-acute-concussion-evaluation-pocket-card.
pleted. Assessment and treatment of other injuries and 
symptoms is initiated per standard medical protocols. 
(The MACE pocket card is available at the Defense and 
Veterans Brain Injury Center website, https://dvbic.
dcoe.mil/material/mace-military-acute-concussionevaluation-pocket-card.) The next (forthcoming) version of the MACE, the MACE 2, will complement the 
Sport Concussion Assessment Tool edition 5 (SCAT 
5), a product of the Berlin consensus work group. 6 The 
MACE 2 will be a multimodal assessment capability, 
and aid in standardized assessment of all the known 
concussion symptom clusters or subtypes. The most 
significant additions are supported by questions and 
assessments, targeting identification of symptom 
manifestations of vestibular effects, oculomotor effects, 
migraine, and anxiety, similar to those seen in sports 
concussion management. 8 
Once a concussion diagnosis is made, results of the 
MACE are used to continue through the concussion 
management algorithms, and treatment depends on 
the clinical findings. However, at a minimum, all SMs 
exposed to a PCE in a deployed location are evaluated 
with the MACE and provided 24 hours of rest/recovery 
time, symptom management, and reevaluation (including exertional testing) once they are symptom free. 
This initial management of concussion may be 
conducted by a medic or corpsman in conjunction 
with a licensed provider. However, the algorithm 
presents a stepwise approach for progressive levels of 
care, from medic/corpsman through primary care, to 
specialty providers (eg, neurology, physical/occupational therapy, neuropsychology) within the deployed 
environment. If an SM does not recover within the 
anticipated timelines, as detailed by the algorithms, 
they are referred to a specialty provider for comprehensive management. Current DoD policy and clinical 
guidance require any SM sustaining more than one 
concussion within a 12-month period to be managed 
with more conservative protocols. If diagnosed with 
a second concussion, the SM receives a minimum of 7 
days of recovery following symptom resolution, and 
then must pass exertional testing prior to return to 
duty. For a third concussion within 12 months, the 
SM undergoes a “recurrent concussion evaluation” 
prior to return to duty. This comprehensive evaluation 
is conducted by a multidisciplinary team of providers 
and includes a history and examination, including 
balance assessment; neuroimaging (as necessary); 
neuropsychological assessment; and a functional assessment. 
Vignette 38-1. A 19-year-old male Army soldier, military 
occupational specialty11B (infantry), was involved in an 
improvised explosive blast that directly hit his Humvee while 
out on patrol. The soldier recalled seeing a flash of light and 
debris, and was thrown against the side of vehicle, then felt 
dazed and confused for about 10 minutes. He developed a 
moderate-severity holocranial headache along with nausea, 
photophobia, and a constant ringing in his ears. He was 
able to ambulate independently but felt off balance and 
reported feeling “not quite right.” Initial evaluation at the 
forward operating base 2 hours after the blast by the 68W 
(medic) was done according to the concussion algorithm, 
and because no red flags were present, the MACE protocol 
was followed. Concussion was confirmed and the score was 
23/green/B (cognitive/neurological/symptoms). The soldier 
was educated about acute concussion and expectation 
for recovery, and given a handout with information about 
concussion symptoms and recovery. His platoon leader 
was notified that the soldier would be required to have a 
minimum of 24 hours of rest after becoming symptom free. 
591
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
The following day, the soldier was evaluated by the unit’s 
physician assistant and felt much better after a good night’s 
sleep. His headache and nausea had resolved and his balance and hearing were back to baseline. His MACE score 
was now 26/green/A, and exertional testing was performed 
without any recurrence of symptoms. He was progressed 
over the next 5 days through the return-to-activity stages 
without difficulty and returned to full duty.
Traumatic Brain Injury With Polytrauma 
Prehospital trauma care performed on the battlefield 
can differ markedly from that performed in the civilian sector. The TCCC guidelines were developed as a 
result, adjusting the previous Advanced Trauma Life 
Support model to meet the specific considerations of 
combat wounds, such as early use of the extremity 
tourniquet for exsanguination and allowing patients 
suffering from uncontrolled hemorrhage to remain in 
a permissive hypotensive state. (Refer to Chapter 33, 
Tactical Medicine, for a complete discussion about 
TCCC principles in the operational environment.) 
TCCC guidelines are maintained by the Joint Trauma 
System (JTS), which serves as the DoD’s Center of 
Excellence for Trauma. The JTS and associated committees meet frequently to update the guidelines, which 
specifically include discussion of moderate, severe, 
and penetrating TBI. The algorithm for the management of concussion/mild TBI in the deployed setting 
is generated by the DVBIC, but it is included with the 
other TCCC guidelines and is used in conjunction with 
the MACE. The JTS uses the DoD Trauma Registry to 
conduct performance improvement projects that guide 
the committees on recommendations and updates to 
both CPGs and equipment. 
Treating TBI in the prehospital environment begins 
with an understanding of the mission, including the 
probability of injuries, as well as limitations when operating austerely and outside of a medical treatment facility. Many factors must be considered to develop a unique 
mission plan that includes specific equipment needs. 
Planning is key to providing optimal care, especially in 
the most complex conditions; it is the foundation for the 
best possible outcomes achievable, even with minimal 
equipment. When planning for possible head injuries, 
the provider should know the location and capabilities 
of DoD, partner nation, and host nation medical facilities 
within the area of operations, particularly the location of 
neurosurgical assets and neuroimaging, which will not 
be available at all evacuation points. Providers should 
conduct independent research to learn about the area of 
operations, such as reviewing TRAVAX.com,13 a website 
providing location-based health information, and other 
independent information sources. Following mission 
planning, it is essential to become familiar with, and 
pack for, the available prehospital medical equipment 
(Class VIII). Deployable units have unit-level packing 
lists that serve as the minimal required equipment to 
treat trauma casualties; special provisions should be 
considered to plan for head injuries and the Class VIII 
equipment required to treat them in the prehospital 
setting.
Hemorrhage is the number one cause of preventable death on the battlefield,14 and the TCCC guidelines place significant emphasis on first responder 
actions and skills to stop bleeding. Hemorrhage and 
the associated treatments can be a confounding factor to the treatment of TBI in the prehospital setting, 
particularly in polytrauma patients when the TBI is 
triaged secondary to addressing massive hemorrhage. 
As a result, providers receiving patients throughout 
the continuum of care must realize TBI may not have 
been addressed until the patient is hemodynamically 
stabilized, which may not have occurred by the time 
a patient arrives to the next level of care.
The prehospital provider’s challenge is to administer lifesaving care while taking into account all 
considerations to prevent or reduce the possibility of 
secondary brain injury. The TCCC guidelines allow 
patients with uncontrollable hemorrhage to remain in 
a hypotensive state, permitting the patient’s systolic 
blood pressure to remain at 90 mm Hg by palpation, or 
evaluation of perfusion through mentation. However, 
recent literature15 suggests that allowing moderate to 
severe TBI patients to remain in a hypotensive state 
is associated with increased probability of secondary 
brain injury and sequelae. Even a single episode of 
hypotension during the prehospital or early hospital 
phases of TBI management is associated with dramatic 
increases in mortality. 
These findings refocus the prehospital provider 
on the importance of perfusion and the brain’s immediate and enduring requirement for oxygenation. 
The role of supplemental oxygenation is not entirely 
clear in this population. While some animal studies 
have shown worsened axonal injury in simulated 
aeromedical evacuation after TBI,16,17 the impact on 
functional outcomes in humans is not fully known. 
Multiple factors must be weighed when determining 
timing of transport to definitive care, and monitoring 
the posttraumatic inflammatory response (both local 
and systemic) may be helpful in timing determinations 
and prevention of secondary brain injury. 18 Operational considerations such as working at altitude in 
mountainous environments must also be integrated 
into medical decision-making. For example, at Fort 
Carson, an Army post at 6,000 feet elevation at the 
base of 14,000-foot mountains, a mild TBI patient who 
has otherwise recovered after concussion may experience recurrence of symptoms with increased exertion, 
particularly at higher altitudes. 
592
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
After the initial trauma survey is complete, the provider will conduct a comprehensive head-to-toe evaluation, and TBI red flags should alert the provider to 
immediate necessary actions. Serial follow-on clinical 
assessments should be performed and documented. 
Early assessment is critical if increased intracranial 
pressure is clinically suspected. While the benefits of 
neuroimaging are well accepted, it is typically unavailable in the forward military operating environment, 
so use of the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (Table 38-3) 
guides early determination of TBI severity. It is important to capture both the initial and a postresuscitation 
GCS score because resuscitation interventions can 
change the patient’s status. 
Identification of pupillary asymmetry can be an 
indicator of elevated intracranial pressure, providing 
a high index of suspicion for brain stem compression 
on the third cranial nerve with impending herniation. 
Bruising behind the ears (Battle sign) or around the 
eyes (“raccoon eyes”), as well as cerebrospinal fluid 
otorrhea and rhinorrhea, are typically associated with 
basilar skull fractures. Blunt trauma and falls should 
prompt consideration of manual spinal immobilization 
during treatment and application of a rigid cervical 
collar. If clinical evidence supports immobilization 
with a spinal board, additional precautions should 
be considered to pad the board and casualty because 
pressure necrosis may take place within hours of initial 
immobilization. Elevating the head of the bed between 
30 and 60 degrees is optimal for casualties with suspected elevated intracranial pressure. 
TABLE 38-3 
GLASGOW COMA SCALE*
Response
Score
Eye response (E)
4 = spontaneous
3 = to sound
2 = to pressure
1 = none
Verbal response (V)
5 = oriented
4 = confused
3 = words
2 = no words, only sounds
1 = none
Motor response (M)
6 = obeys commands
5 = localizing
4 = normal flexion
3 = abnormal flexion
2 = abnormal extension
1 = none 
Key: Severe: GCS 3–8; Moderate: GCS 9–12; Mild: GCS 13–15
*The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) scoring assessment is currently in 
transition: the pain stimulus has been replaced with pressure at the 
finger tip, trapezius, or supraorbital notch. The impact of this change 
to protocols and guidelines has yet to be determined. The modification 
can be found on the GCS website: https://www.glasgowcomascale.
org/. Additionally noted is the rating of non-testable (NT), which is 
applied when there is an identifiable limiting factor.
CONCUSSION MANAGEMENT IN NONDEPLOYED SETTINGS
Algorithms for Garrison Concussion Management 
In 2013, the Army began requiring parallel efforts 
(event-driven protocols) to evaluate and manage 
concussion in the garrison environment, using a set 
of algorithms from point of injury through 7 days. 19 
Unlike the deployed practice that includes a comprehensive concussion algorithm beyond the initial 
7 days, the garrison version uses the VA/DoD CPG5 
after the first week. An additional difference is that in 
the garrison algorithms, only SMs with a diagnosed 
concussion have mandatory downtime, while in the 
deployed environment all SMs exposed to a PCE are 
given 24 hours downtime. However, consistent with 
changes captured in the Berlin consensus statements, 
all concussion management in the DoD is moving 
toward the progressive return to activity guideline7 
in combination with the MACE 2, as discussed above, 
and updated clinical management guidelines for both 
deployed and garrison settings. This is a shift from the 
total rest required in the 2012 policy, and initiates individualized rehabilitation plans based on the patient’s 
unique presentation. 
Return to Play: High School, College, and State 
Requirements
While sports concussion has some notable differences from combat-acquired TBI, there are many 
similarities, and much of the research done on sports 
concussion has been applied to military injuries. 
Guidance on return-to-play after sports concussion 
has evolved in the past 5 to 10 years, with increasing 
utilization of progressive return to play and normal 
activity. The guidance initially focused on slowing 
return to sports; later, increased attention was paid to 
the impact of cognitive stress on recovery from concussion, particularly as it pertained to student athletes. All 
50 states and Washington, DC, now have some form 
of “when in doubt, sit them out” concussion laws, 
593
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
and many states now have guidance or laws requiring preseason education for athletes, parents, coaches, 
and teachers. 20 Capabilities range from little leagues, 
with limited availability of clinical providers and associated funding, to high school systems that leverage 
athletic trainers, to the National Collegiate Athletic 
Association, which often mirrors professional sports 
with increasing capabilities from sideline to hospital 
system integration. 
These trends are consistent with international guidance, most recently in 2017 with the 5th International 
Consensus Conference on Sports Concussion, held in 
Berlin, Germany. 6 This guidance calls for supportive 
care during the initial recovery period, with gradual return to sport and school, based on symptom resolution 
and progressive increase in activity levels. The consensus also recommends referral to specialty rehabilitation 
care for persistent postconcussion symptoms, defined 
as those remaining after 10 to 14 days for adults or 
after 4 weeks for children. For these patients, providers should individualize an exercise program, target 
therapy toward specific disorders, and use cognitive 
behavioral therapy for any mood component.
Progressive Return to Activity 
In 2014, the DVBIC published a clinical recommendation on progressive return to activity (Table 38-4) 
following acute concussion or mild TBI. 7 Based on published literature and expert opinion, the guidelines are 
similar to the International Consensus6 on graduated 
return to sport. To monitor postconcussion symptoms 
and assess patients for graduated return to activity, 
the Neurobehavioral Symptoms Inventory (NSI), a 
self-report survey, is used throughout the DoD and 
VA. It asks concussed individuals to rate 22 symptoms 
from 0 to 4, with 0 as “rarely or never present” and 4 as 
“very severe.” The recommendation then provides for 
six stages of recovery. Stage 1 is Rest (see Table 38-4), 
intended to minimize physical and cognitive exertion 
for the first 24 hours after concussion. Progression 
through the six stages occurs incrementally every 24 
hours if symptoms are rated as none or mild (0–1). A 
critical component of the protocol is early education 
and expectation for recovery, which has proven to 
be effective in reducing the number and duration of 
symptoms. 21 As noted previously, progressive return 
to activity complements updated assessment tools 
such as the SCAT 5 and MACE 2, used in combination 
to individualize rehabilitation plans. 
TABLE 38-4 
STAGES OF THE PROGRESSIVE RETURN TO 
ACTIVITY PROCESS
Stage
Description
Objective
1
Rest
Symptom resolution
2
Light routine 
activity
Introduce and promote limited effort
3
Light occupationoriented activity
Increase light activities that 
require a combined use of 
physical, cognitive, and/or 
balance skills
4
Moderate activity
Increase the intensity and 
complexity of physical, cognitive, and balance activities
5
Intensive activity
Introduce activity of duration 
and intensity that parallels 
the service member’s typical 
role, function, and tempo
6
Unrestricted 
activity
Return to pre-injury activities
MANAGEMENT OF POSTCONCUSSIVE SYMPTOMS
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of 
Concussion/Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
The TBI CPG, initially developed in 2009 and 
updated in 2016,5 provides evidence-based recommendations to help guide clinical decision-making. 
In addition, despite a lack of randomized clinical 
trials for treatment of postconcussive symptoms, 
best practices based on literature reviews, expert 
consensus, and common clinical practice are included to help guide management where evidence 
is insufficient for a definitive recommendation. 
The CPG provides algorithms for management of 
symptoms persisting more than 7 days, as well as 
detailed information on clinical symptom management on multiple co-occurring conditions, including headache, dizziness and disequilibrium, visual 
symptoms, fatigue, sleep disturbance, cognitive 
symptoms, persistent pain, hearing difficulties, 
smelling changes, nausea, changes in appetite, and 
numbness. An evidence table is also provided, outlining the level of medical evidence for the various 
recommendations. The full guidelines are provided 
in great detail, with over 100 pages of text. Additional useful tools include a clinician summary, 
patient summary, and pocket card. 5
594
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Patient-Centered Care
Postconcussive symptoms are often broken down 
into physical, cognitive, and emotional/behavioral 
categories. Key to caring for individuals with postconcussive symptoms in the acute, postacute, and chronic 
time periods is patient-centered care. A patient’s issues and symptoms can be as unique and complex as 
the individuals themselves. Severity of injury (mild, 
moderate, or severe) does not always correlate to 
severity of symptoms; outcomes are determined by 
individual factors in addition to the initial severity of injury. Moderate and severe brain injuries are 
most often cared for in inpatient hospital and rehabilitation center settings with subsequent outpatient 
rehabilitation care. Postconcussive care, however, 
is usually primary care based, with rehabilitation 
providers and other consultants treating only those 
with prolonged symptoms not responding to usual 
care, or those with significantly complex comorbidities. In recent years, the military has increased use of 
intensive outpatient programs for complex mild TBI 
patients, utilizing multiple disciplines, including rehabilitation, behavioral health, and complementary 
and alternative modalities, to address multiple issues 
in a time-intensive, focused manner, with the goal of 
improving functional outcomes. 
Postconcussive symptoms are not specific to concussion; they are seen in a variety of other medical 
conditions, particularly psychological conditions that 
are often comorbid with chronic postconcussive symptoms. 22 In fact, all of the symptoms listed on the NSI 
are seen at some percentage at baseline in a normal 
(nonclinical) population: rates of moderate or more 
severe symptoms in a nonclinical civilian sample who 
took the NSI ranged from 2. 7% for taste/smell changes, 
to as high as 50% for fatigue, and 43% for concentration. 23 Misattribution of all symptoms to TBI can lead 
to unnecessary anxiety or other medical conditions 
being overlooked.
Most individuals will recover relatively quickly after concussion; however, previously reported recovery 
rates of 80% to 90% within 7 to 10 days after injury24 
may have been optimistic and skewed due to group 
data rather than individual outcomes. Despite a minority of patients with prolonged symptoms, most recover 
within 1 month, and those with chronic symptoms (>12 
weeks) should have a multidisciplinary evaluation 
and treatment to aide recovery. Progressive return 
to activity, combined with individualized rehabilitation plans built around symptom clusters,8 can help 
minimize exacerbation of symptoms and avoid repeat 
injury during the early recovery phase. Those with prolonged symptoms require individualized progression 
of activity because extended strict rest can also lead 
to increased social isolation and deconditioning, and 
may potentially exacerbate symptom reporting rather 
than improve recovery. 25
Data for Army soldiers suggests a different recovery trajectory after a concussion sustained during deployment. The Warrior Strong Study, which sampled 
soldiers returning from deployment in Afghanistan 
or Iraq to Fort Carson and Fort Bragg between 2009 
and 2014, found that nearly 50% of those who had 
a deployment-related mild TBI reported one or 
more severe or very severe symptoms on the NSI 
3 months after redeployment, compared to 25% of 
those without a concussion on that deployment. 26 
The most common symptoms were sleep problems 
(30%), forgetfulness (21%), irritability (17%), and 
headaches (15%). Traditionally, vestibular and 
oculomotor symptoms were not assessed early in 
the course of treatment, which may skew historical 
data on symptom presentation for acute concussion. 
However, tools such as the Vestibular and Oculomotor Screening (VOMS), which can identify deficits in 
vestibular and oculomotor domains in acute concussion, are increasingly being used. These assessments, 
combined with individualized rehabilitation plans 
in the acute setting, are beginning to demonstrate 
earlier symptom recovery in both acute and chronic 
concussion. 8
From the civilian literature, risk factors for prolonged symptoms and slower recovery include prior 
concussions,27,28 prior history of headaches,28 and extremes of age (youngest28 and oldest29). Findings on 
gender are mixed, though several studies suggest a 
female predominance for prolonged symptoms, and 
a recent systematic review of the literature suggested 
that the teenage years were the most vulnerable time 
period, greater in girls than in boys. 30 Pre-injury mental 
health disorders are also a risk factor for prolonged 
symptoms. 30 
In the military setting, comorbid posttraumatic 
stress has consistently been correlated with increasing persistence of postconcussive symptoms. 31 In one 
systematic review the frequency of posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) in those with probable mild 
TBI ranged from 33% to 39%. 32 The directionality of 
the interaction between mild TBI and PTSD is unclear; 
however, clinical experience shows that both conditions must be addressed for best outcomes. In military 
concussion centers, the behavioral health component 
is often embedded within the concussion clinic to 
provide interdisciplinary care. Two other factors associated with ongoing prolonged symptoms noted in 
the Warrior Strong Study were combat exposure and 
noncephalic pain. 26
595
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
Assessments for Common Postconcussive 
Symptoms 
Sleep problems after concussion are common and 
can present in various ways. In a meta-analysis, 50% of 
patients experienced some form of sleep disturbance 
after TBI, including higher than normal population 
rates of insomnia (29%), hypersomnia (28%), and sleep 
apnea (25%). 33 These sleep disturbances are important 
to evaluate and address early. In the case of insomnia, 
early intervention is particularly important to mitigate 
bad habits that can perpetuate poor sleep onset and 
sleep maintenance. Circadian rhythm sleep–wake 
disorders are also seen at higher frequency after concussion. These disorders can manifest as insomnia, 
hypersomnia, or both, depending on the misalignment 
between the intrinsic circadian rhythm and the desired sleep–wake cycle (eg, delayed circadian rhythm 
“night owls” will struggle with evening insomnia and 
morning hypersomnia in the setting of typical military 
bedtime and wake time). This problem is particularly 
salient in a military population of young soldiers because young adults tend to have a more delayed 
circadian rhythm to begin with, which can be further 
compounded after concussion. Sleep apnea should 
also be considered in those with complaints of daytime 
somnolence, nonrefreshing sleep, or ongoing cognitive 
complaints. Both obstructive and central sleep apnea 
are more common in those who have experienced TBI, 
and the effects of sleep apnea on cognition appear to be 
amplified in this population, particularly in the areas 
of sustained attention and memory. 34,35
Cognitive symptoms after concussion can be associated with a variety of factors, including poor sleep, 
distraction from pain (such as headaches) or dizziness, 
and medication side effects, especially for those with 
polytrauma or concurrent musculoskeletal injury. Anxiety and mood disorders can significantly affect attention and concentration, which in turn impact memory, 
and can present as cognitive symptoms. However, 
comprehensive neuropsychological testing is not recommended in the first 30 days after mild TBI. 5 Per the 
CPG,5 those who have ongoing symptoms beyond 30 
days may be referred for neuropsychological testing, 
cognitive assessment for functional limitations, and 
treatment by rehabilitation therapists with expertise in 
TBI rehabilitation. Typically in the setting of prolonged 
cognitive symptoms, other treatable conditions related 
to memory and attention should be excluded (such as 
thyroid disorders, vitamin B12 deficiency, syphilis, 
sleep disorders, structural central nervous system 
lesions, and mood disorders) either clinically or by 
appropriate testing. Neuropsychological testing typically includes validity/performance measures, which 
may include stand-alone or embedded measures to 
increase confidence in the validity of a test battery and 
overall assessment. Such measures look for consistency 
between test behavior or self-reported symptoms and 
known patterns of performance, such as better performance on difficult tasks than on easy tasks. In the mild 
TBI population, rates of failure on validity measures 
(or the confidence that the test is measuring a true 
concussion deficit versus intentional/unintentional 
artifact) can range from 17% to 58%,36,37 representing 
a significant portion of this population. Debate exists 
about the best approach to this patient population, in 
which measuring objective deficits and progress poses 
a true challenge, and concerns about secondary gain 
(emotional or financial, conscious or subconscious) 
can also be present. However, a functional approach 
to patient-centered goals, along with minimizing the 
perception of disability, is recommended by the VA/
DoD CPG. Patients presenting with over-reporting of 
symptoms or invalid findings on objective testing must 
not routinely be discounted because the presentation 
may be subconscious or a “cry for help.” The CPG 
strategy offers a practical approach to challenging 
patients, and with buy-in and patient engagement in 
the rehabilitation process, realistic expectations can be 
set by the patient and the treatment team.
Comorbid psychological conditions are common after concussion, particularly in cases of combat-related 
concussion or a traumatic event such as assault or 
severe injury in an accident. Conditions range from 
adjustment disorder related to the changes in function 
after concussion, to frank depression, anxiety, or acute 
stress reaction/PTSD. Irritable mood can accompany 
any of these psychological conditions, and irritability 
can be worsened by poor sleep and aggravated by 
frontal lobe executive dysfunction. Therefore, early 
and ongoing monitoring for emotional and behavioral symptoms in the acute, post-acute, and chronic 
postconcussive periods are critical, as is ensuring 
appropriate referrals to address these symptoms, 
most commonly with cognitive behavioral therapy. 
Medication treatment is guided by the primary diagnosis and applicable CPGs for the condition. Of note, 
no medications have been approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration specifically for the treatment of 
postconcussive symptoms (behavioral or physical). 
The VA/DoD CPG states, “We recommend that the 
presence of psychological or behavioral symptoms 
following TBI should be evaluated and managed according to existing evidence based CPGs, and based 
upon individual factors and the nature and severity 
of symptoms.”5
Headaches attributed to traumatic injury to the 
head, by the International Classification of Headache 
596
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
otolaryngology, audiology, or physical therapy may be 
indicated for complaints of vertigo, visual disorientation, or imbalance. For patients with lightheadedness, 
further evaluation for syncope or pre-syncope may 
be necessary, and autonomic dysfunction should be 
considered along with a cardiovascular evaluation. 
Along with balance and dizziness symptoms, tinnitus, 
peripheral hearing loss, or central auditory processing 
disorder may be present. Central auditory processing 
disorder, related to central nervous system disturbances can manifest as difficulties understanding what is 
heard, particularly in busy venues where multitasking 
or focused attention is required. 43 
EXHIBIT 38-3
HEADACHE RED FLAGS AND 
INDICATIONS FOR REFERRAL 
Red flags in evaluation of posttraumatic headaches 
for primary care providers to refer for emergency or 
specialty evaluation.
Indications for Emergency Referral
 
• Concussion red flags
 
• Thunderclap headache
 
• Sudden neurological deficit
 
• Persistent bleeding from nose, ears, or scalp
 
• Cranial fracture
 
• Infection resulting from a penetrating injury
 
• Cerebrospinal fluid leakage (nose or ears)
 
• Intracranial hemorrhage on CT
Indications for Specialty Referral
 
• Presence of systemic symptoms
 
• Associated neurological symptoms
 
• Onset after age 50
 
• Change in pattern of headache
 
• Valsalva precipitation
 
• Postural aggravation
 
• Papilledema
 
• TMJ disorder
 
• ENT disorder
CT: computed tomography
TMJ: temporomandibular joint
ENT: ear, nose, and throat
Reproduced from: Defense Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury. DCoE clinical recommendation, management of headache following concussion / mild traumatic brain injury: guidance for primary care 
management in deployed and non-deployed settings. https://
dvbic.dcoe.mil/material/management-headache-followingconcussionmild-tbi-guidance-primary-care-managementdeploye-0. Published February 2016. Accessed May 24, 2018.
Disorders (3rd edition, beta version), are divided into 
acute (resolves within 3 months) and persistent (persists >3 months) conditions. 38 For mild TBI, headache 
onset must be within 7 days of the injury event or after 
discontinuation of medication that may impair the 
ability to sense the headache. Some experts expand 
this window to 30 days after the head injury event, 
and this longer timeframe was elected for use by the 
Defense Center of Excellence clinical recommendation 
for management of headache after concussion. 39 Headaches attributed to TBI may have a variety of clinical 
presentations. They can mimic any of the primary 
headache disorders, including (most often) migraine 
and tension type headaches, and (less often) neuralgic or other headache disorders. Secondary headache 
disorders unrelated to the concussion must also be 
considered (Exhibit 38-3 lists red flags for referral). 
Treatments, based upon the semiology of headache 
presentation, are the same as for the primary headache 
disorder. 39 With any chronic headache syndrome, 
caution should be used to avoid medication-overuse 
headaches (“rebound headache”), in which frequent 
analgesic use worsens the headache syndrome. If daily 
analgesics are required for a prolonged duration (more 
than a few weeks), consideration should be given to 
prophylactic headache therapy.
Studies have shown that 20% of patients with TBI 
and 47% of moderate brain injury patients complain 
of ongoing dizziness beyond 5 years post-injury. 40 
Peterson40 suggests that independent of severity or 
mechanism of injury, dizziness, migraine-associated 
dizziness, exercise-induced dizziness, spatial disorientation, and balance impairment41 are common complaints among TBI patients, with a rate between 30% 
and 80%. Patient descriptions of these problems can 
be challenging for diagnostic purposes; for example, 
patients may use the terms “woozy,” “light-headed,” 
“spacy,” or “feeling drunk.” The following four categories describing aspects of dizziness may be more 
useful to clinicians: 
 
1. vertigo, the illusory sensation of motion;
 
2. visual disorientation, with complaints such as 
disorientation or nausea when walking down 
a supermarket aisle or being in a crowd, and 
motion sensitivity; 
 
3. light-headedness, the symptom likened to 
those preceding syncope (a sensation just 
before fainting or loss of consciousness); and 
 
4. imbalance, feelings of unsteadiness, or being 
prone to stumbling or falling. 42 
Depending on the presentation and examination 
findings, additional consultation from neurology, 
597
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
Visual function may also be affected after concussion, with accommodation disturbance and convergence insufficiency most commonly noted. 44,45 As with 
the NSI symptoms, both of these conditions are seen 
in the general population but may become decompensated after concussion. Such visual disturbances 
may respond to treatments ranging from prescription 
lenses to vision rehabilitation in cases of prolonged 
symptoms.
Vignette 38-2. A 28-year-old male Special Forces soldier with 10 years’ time-in-service and three prior combat 
deployments was evaluated after a fall while skiing during 
a training exercise with his unit. His last memory was riding up the chair lift. Witnesses reported that he had a bad 
landing after “catching air” while going over a small cliff, hit 
the back of his head, then rolled nearly 100 feet down the 
steep mountain. During the evaluation, which took place 
immediately, the soldier opened his eyes and moved all 
extremities normally, but was disoriented and asked the 
same questions repetitively. His GCS score was 14. Cervical spine precautions were put in place, and he was then 
evaluated emergently at a civilian hospital with both CT head 
and c-spine, which showed no acute findings. 
However, he had ongoing musculoskeletal neck pain 
and headache and was given a week of convalescent 
leave to recover. Evaluation after the recovery week by his 
primary care physician noted ongoing symptoms of severe 
headaches with light sensitivity, sound sensitivity, nausea, 
and even occasional vomiting, especially with exertion. 
Progression of activity beyond stage 4 (moderate activity) 
was not successful even 3 weeks after the concussion, and 
the soldier became frustrated that he could not exercise to 
maintain his high level of fitness, nor perform his full work 
duties. Specifically, when he went to the gym, he was unable 
to lift weights and run as fast as he had previously, and he 
could not keep up with his Special Forces peers. 
He was referred to the concussion/TBI clinic for further 
evaluation, where additional history revealed at least five 
prior concussions, including three prior blast concussions 
and two related to jumps, as well as a history of playing 
football in high school. In addition, he had significant 
blast exposures during a prior deployment in 2009, with 
hundreds of door breaches without definitive concussions, 
and he was involved in one ambush where three of his 
team members were killed in action. Recurrent nightmares 
and flashbacks were a common occurrence. However, he 
never reported or sought medical attention for previous 
symptoms; rather, he simply “soldiered on,” performing 
well on his team until this recent injury. 
Examination showed significant musculoskeletal tenderness in the paraspinal neck muscles and restricted range of 
motion secondary to pain, along with orthostatic tachycardia 
and convergence insufficiency. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was normal, and MRI c-spine showed 
mild degenerative changes but was otherwise unremarkable. The soldier was referred for rehab services, including 
physical therapy to address the cervical symptoms, graduated return to exercise, optometry and occupational therapy 
for vision rehabilitation, and psychology to address his prior 
trauma as well as current adjustment to physical limitations. 
Cognitive rehabilitation for memory strategies as well as 
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia was provided to 
address memory and attention issues that were likely due 
to poor sleep, pain, and mood. 
With these services, medications for his migrainous headaches, and better pacing of his activities, the soldier steadily 
improved, and 4 months after the ski accident he was able 
to return to full duty, using only abortive medications for rare 
headaches. After this experience, he also identified two 
team members who were also struggling with headaches 
and mood symptoms, prompting their evaluation and treatment, which resulted in the team becoming healthier and 
stronger for future missions.
Neuroimaging Beyond the Immediate Period 
Neuroimaging is not required for the diagnosis of 
mild TBI, nor is it required for routine evaluation of 
mild TBI/concussion in all cases. In concussion, imaging is most often normal. Red flags should be used to 
guide the need for imaging in the immediate period 
after TBI, and the modality of choice during this time 
is a non-contrast CT head. Two common sets of criteria 
used to determine need for imaging in the immediate 
period are the New Orleans criteria46 and the Canadian 
CT head rule. 47 The goal of imaging immediately after 
injury is to identify intracranial pathology that might 
require neurosurgical intervention or closer monitoring for intracranial bleeding that could increase and 
require urgent evacuation. 
After the immediate period, the imaging modality of choice (if available and in the absence of contraindications) is MRI,48 which is a more sensitive 
tool for detecting subtle structural lesions than CT 
head. The goals of imaging beyond the immediate 
period are to help understand persistent symptoms, 
guide specialist referral, and ensure accurate diagnosis if evaluation was delayed. MRI should include 
susceptibility weighted imaging/graded recall echo 
sequences, which are particularly sensitive for 
identifying areas of diffuse axonal injury or prior 
microhemorrhage. 48 Diffusion tensor imaging and 
functional MRI are modalities that hold promise 
for future use in subacute and chronic periods of 
TBI, but they are not yet widely available in routine 
clinical practice. Nuclear imaging studies such as 
positron emission tomography and single-photon 
emission computed tomography scans may be 
considered in cases where structural imaging is 
normal, but these modalities are best interpreted 
in a clinical context and in the setting of specialty 
neuroscience care. 
598
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
RESEARCH AND FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS
The DoD research portfolio for TBI is gap-driven 
and tied to military requirements, meaning that 
funds are awarded based on the ability to study and 
answer military-specific research questions or develop 
a capability. This is different from the way in which 
most other federal research dollars are spent, such 
as through the National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
where the projects are investigator driven. The DoD 
currently has three general TBI focus areas: prevention (including blast and impact TBI), combat casualty 
care–related neurotrauma, and rehabilitation. The 
DoD also coordinates the TBI portfolio closely with 
the NIH and the VA, particularly in accordance with 
the National Research Action Plan (NRAP), as directed 
by a 2012 presidential executive order. Through the 
NRAP, federal agencies seek complementary, rather 
than overlapping, portfolios. The NRAP also seeks to 
maximize successful analysis of data from TBI studies 
through a requirement to share all data from federally 
funded studies.
Priority areas within the DoD portfolio include 
longitudinal studies seeking to understand the progression of TBI and how the injury evolves over time. 
Point-of-injury screening, diagnosis, and monitoring 
capabilities are another military focus area. Devices 
capable of determining at the point of injury whether a 
closed head injury has resulted in bleeding, equivalent 
to a positive CT scan, are of particular interest and applicability to battlefield medicine; two devices were recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
for this indication. Simultaneously, the DoD is seeking 
to better understand the forces (blast or impact) associated with TBI and subclinical exposure to PCEs. The 
goal of this portfolio is to reduce exposure by modifying tactics, techniques, procedures, and equipment for 
tasks that put SMs at risk for a potential injury. 
SUMMARY
The general management and rehabilitation of 
patients with TBI has evolved into a process of prevention, immediate identification and assessment, 
early education, graduated return to activity, and, 
for those with prolonged symptoms, an interdisciplinary evaluation coupled with progressive and 
targeted rehabilitation. Even in cases of mild TBI, 
care has progressed from limited if any treatment, 
to comprehensive evaluation with progressive advancement in physical and cognitive exertion, with 
the goal of full reintegration and return to duty. 
The treatment model has advanced from limiting 
the severity of symptoms of the injury itself, to individualized rehabilitation based on each person’s 
presentation, unique strengths, and comorbidities. A 
person’s psychological, genetic, and physical traits 
cannot be uncoupled from the injury and its effects. 
Research on all aspects of TBI has increased since the 
conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan began, and it has 
shaped the way care is provided. Ongoing research 
and clinical efforts will continue to benefit SMs and 
veterans in the future.
REFERENCES
 
1. Sahlas D. Functional neuroanatomy in the pre-hippocratic era: observations from the Iliad by Homer. Neurosurgery. 
2001;48(6):1352–1357. 
 
2. Defense and Veterans Brain Injury Center. DoD numbers for traumatic brain injury worldwide, totals, 2000–2017. 
http://dvbic.dcoe.mil/files/tbi-numbers/worldwide-totals-2000-2017_feb-14-2018_v1. 0_2018-03-08.pdf. Accessed May 
24, 2018.
 
3. US Department of Defense. DoD Policy Guidance for Management of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury/Concussion in the Deployed Setting. Washington, DC: DoD; 2012. DoD Instruction 6490. 11. http://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/
DD/issuances/dodi/649011p.pdf. Accessed August 23, 2018.
 
4. Woodson J. Traumatic Brain Injury: Updated Definition and Reporting. Washington, DC: US Department of Defense; 2015.
 
5. US Department of Veterans Affairs. VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline: Management of Concussion-mild Traumatic Brain 
Injury (mTBI) (2016). https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/Rehab/mtbi/. Accessed May 23, 2018.
 
6. McCrory P, Meeuwisse W, Dvorak J, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in sport—the 5th international conference on concussion in sport held in Berlin, October 2016. Br J Sports Med. 2017;51:838–847. 
599
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
 
7. Defense Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury. Progressive return to activity 
following concussion/mild traumatic brain injury. DCoE clinical recommendation. https://dvbic.dcoe.mil/files/
resources/2013_PRA_Rehab_CR_FINAL.pdf. Published January 2014. Accessed May 24, 2018.
 
8. Kontos AP, Collins MW, Holland CL. Preliminary evidence for improvement in symptoms, cognitive, vestibular, and 
oculomotor outcomes following targeted intervention with chronic mTBI patients. Mil Med. 2018;183(suppl 1):333–338. 
doi: 10. 1093/milmed/usx172.
 
9. Regasa LE, Thomas DM, Gill RS, Marion DW, Ivins BJ. Military deployment may increase the risk for traumatic brain 
injury following deployment. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2016;31(1)E28–35.
 10. Williams VF, Stahlman S, Hunt DJ, O’Donnell, FL. Diagnoses of traumatic brain injury not clearly associated with 
deployment, active component, US armed forces, 2001–2016. MSMR. 2017; 4(3):2–8.
 11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Annual number of TBIs. https://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/pdf/
tbi_blue_book_annualnumber.pdf. Accessed August 23, 2018.
 12. Giza CC, Hovda DA. The new neurometabolic cascade of concussion. Neurosurgery. 2014;75:S24–S33.
 13. Shorland Travax website. https://www.travax.com. Accessed May 24, 2018.
 14. Eastridge BJ, Mabry RL, Seguin P, et al. Death on the battlefield (2001-2011): implications for the future of combat 
casualty care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(6 Suppl 5):S431–S437.
 15. Spaite DW, Hu C, Bobrow BJ, et al. Association of out-of-hospital hypotension depth and duration with traumatic 
brain injury mortality. Ann Emerg Med. 2017;70:522–530.
 16. Proctor JL, Mello KT, Fang R, et al. Aeromedical evacuation-relevant hypobaria worsens axonal and neurologic injury 
in rats after underbody blast induced hyperacceleration. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;83(1 Suppl1):S35–S42.
 17. Scultetus AH, Hague A, Chun SJ, et al. Brain hypoxia is exacerbated in hypobaria during aeromedical evacuation in 
swine with traumatic brain injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;81(1):101–107.
 18. Goodman MD, Makley AT, Lentsch, et al. traumatic brain injury and aeromedical evacuation: when is the brain fit to 
fly? J Surg Res. 2010;164(2):286–293.
 19. US Army. Traumatic brain injury. https://www.army.mil/standto/archive_2015-03-02. Published March 2, 2015. Accessed August 23, 2018.
 20. American Association for Justice. State concussion laws. https://www.justice.org/state-concussion-laws. Accessed May 
24, 2018.
 21. Ponsford J, Willmott C, Rothwell A, et al. Impact of early intervention on outcome following mild head injury in adults. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2002;73;330–332.
 22. King PR, Donnelly KT, Donnelly JP, et al. Psychometric study of the Neurobehavioral Symptom Inventory. J Rehabil 
Res Dev. 2012;49(6):879-88.
 23. Sullivan KA, Lurie JK. Principal components analysis of the Neurobehavioral Symptom Inventory in a nonclinical 
civilian sample. Appl Neuropsychol Adult. 2017;24:522–531.
 24. McCrory P, Meeuwisse W, Johnston K, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 3rd International Conference on Concussion in Sport, held in Zurich, November 2008. J Clin Neurosci. 2009;16:755–763.
 25. Thomas DG, Apps HN, Hoffmann RG, McCrea M, Hammeke T. Benefits of strict rest after acute concussion: a randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2015;135(2);213–223.
 26. Schwab K, Terrio HP, Brenner LA, et al. Epidemiology and prognosis of mild traumatic brain injury in returning 
soldiers: a cohort study. Neurology. 2017;88(16);1571–1579.
600
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 27. Guskiewicz KM, McCrea M, Marshall SW, et al. Cumulative effects associated with recurrent concussion in collegiate 
football players: the NCAA Concussion Study. JAMA. 2003;290(19):2549–2555.
 28. Giza CC, Kutcher JS, Ashwal S, et al. Summary of evidence-based guideline update: evaluation and management of 
concussion in sports: report of the Guideline Development Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. 
Neurology. 2013;80:2250–2257.
 29. Benedict PA, Baner NV, Harrold GK, et al. Gender and age predict outcomes of cognitive, balance, and vision in a 
multidisciplinary concussion center. J Neurol Sci. 2015;353(1-2):111–115.
 30. Iverson GL, Gardner AJ, Terry DP, et al. Predictors of clinical recovery from concussion: a systematic review. Br J 
Sports Med. 2017;51(12):941–948.
 31. Hoge CW, McGurk D, Thomas JL, Cox AL, Engel CC, Castro CA. Mild traumatic brain injury in US soldiers returning 
from Iraq. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:453–463.
 32. Carlson KF, Kehle SM, Meis LA, et al. Prevalence, assessment, and treatment of mild traumatic brain injury and posttraumatic stress disorder: a systematic review of the evidence. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2011;26(2):103–115.
 33. Mathias JL, Alvaro PK. Prevalence of sleep disturbances, disorders, and problems following traumatic brain injury: 
A meta-analysis. Sleep Med. 2012;13:898–905.
 34. Wilde MC, Castriotta RJ, Lai JM, Atanasov S, Masel BE, Kuna ST. Cognitive impairment in patients with traumatic 
brain injury and obstructive sleep apnea. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88:1284–1288.
 35. Wickwire EM, Williams SG, Roth T, et al. Sleep, sleep disorders and mild traumatic brain injury. What we know and 
what we need to know: Findings from a national working group. Neurotherapeutics. 2016;13(2):403–417.
 36. Armistead-Jehle P. Symptom validity test performance in US veterans referred for evaluation of mild TBI. Appl Neuropsychol. 2010;17:52–59.
 37. Whitney AW, Shepard PH, Whilliams AL, Davis JJ, Adams KJ. The Medical Symptoms Validity Test in the evaluation of Operation Iraqi Freedom-Operation Enduring Freedom soldiers: A preliminary study. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 
2009;24:145–152.
 38. International Headache Society. International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition, beta version. https://
www.ichd-3.org/. Accessed August 23, 2018.
 39. Defense Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury. DCoE clinical recommendation, 
management of headache following concussion/mild traumatic brain injury: guidance for primary care management 
in deployed and non-deployed settings. https://dvbic.dcoe.mil/material/management-headache-followingconcussionmild-tbi-guidance-primary-care-management-deploye-0. Published February 2016. Accessed May 24, 2018.
 40. Peterson MD. A case-oriented approach exploring the relationship between visual and vestibular disturbances and 
problems of higher-level mobility in persons with traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2010;25(3):193–205.
 41. Gottshall K. Vestibular rehabilitation after mild traumatic brain injury with vestibular pathology. NeuroRehabilitation. 
2011;29(2):167–171.
 42. Gizzi M, Rosenberg ML. The diagnostic approach to the dizzy patient. Neurologist. 1998;4(3):138.
 43. Fausti SA, Wilmington DJ, Gallun FJ, Meyers PJ and Henry JA. Auditory and vestibular dysfunction associated with 
blast-related traumatic brain injury. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2009;46(6):797–810.
 44. Barnett BP, Singman EL. Vision concerns after mild traumatic brain injury. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2015;17(2)329.
 45. Pearce KL, Sufrinko A, Lau BC, Henry L, Collins MW, Kontos AP. Near point of convergence after a sport-related 
concussion: measurement reliability and relationship to neurocognitive impairment and symptoms. Am J Sports Med. 
2015;43(12):3055–3061.
601
Traumatic Brain Injury in the Military
 46. Haydel M, Preston CA, Mills TJ, Luber S, Blaudeau E, DeBlieux PM. Indications for computed tomography in patients 
with minor head injury. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(2):100–105.
 47. Stiell IG, Wells GA, Vandemheen K, et al. The Canadian CT Head Rule for patients with minor head injury. Lancet. 
2001:357:1391–1396.
 48. Defense Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury. DCoE clinical recommendation, 
neuroimaging following mild traumatic brain injury in the non-deployed setting. https://dvbic.dcoe.mil/material/
neuroimaging-following-mild-tbi-non-deployed-setting-clinical-recommendation. Published July 2013. Accessed May 
24, 2018.
602
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
