145
Military Medicine in the Operational and Strategic Context
Chapter 9
MILITARY MEDICINE IN THE OPERATIONAL AND STRATEGIC CONTEXT
ERIC B. SCHOOMAKER, MD, PhD*
INTRODUCTION
THE FOUR INSTRUMENTS OF NATIONAL POWER
ROLE OF MILITARY MEDICINE IN NATIONAL DEFENSE
DIMENSIONS OF COMPLEXITY IN LEADER ENGAGEMENT AND 
ORGANIZATION
 “THE STRATEGIC CORPORAL”
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
*Professor and Vice Chair, Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland; 
formerly, Surgeon General, US Army, and Commanding General, US Army Medical Command
146
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
“You know you never defeated us on the battlefield,” said the American colonel.
The North Vietnamese colonel pondered this remark a moment. 
“That may be so,” he replied, “But it’s also irrelevant.”
—Conversation in Hanoi, April 19751
INTRODUCTION
With this poignant yet profound exchange between two former enemies during the negotiations 
to end the Vietnam War, the author, Harry Summers 
Jr, a war-tested professional soldier, summarized a 
decade-long conflict that took the lives of over 50,000 
Americans as well as countless Vietnamese, Laotian, 
and Cambodian fighters and civilians, and plunged 
the United States into a generation of soul-searching 
and political discord. 1 It captures the essence of what 
one of the seminal writers on the nature of war, the 
Prussian military theorist Carl Philipp Gottfried von 
Clausewitz, wrote: “War is merely a continuation 
of policy [or politics] by other means.”2,3(I-1–I-4) The 
American and allied military in the Vietnam War were 
superior in almost every regard to their North Vietnamese regulars and Viet Cong guerilla counterparts. 
But this proved to be inadequate as they failed to break 
the will of the North Vietnamese to fight while losing 
a critical social and political struggle at home, which 
resulted in the loss of the American people’s will to 
continue the war. In sum, while the field engagements 
of the American military were almost uniformly successful, the larger US strategy, needed to win the war 
of wills, was not.
As a young medical student in the early 1970s struggling to learn the details of human physiology and 
anatomy, and to apply my nascent diagnostic acumen 
and newfound respect for therapeutics to human disease, I had a similar “ah-ha” moment late one night in 
our university hospital. Seeking a place where I could 
read and reflect, I took a little-used elevator to a top, 
otherwise vacant floor of the hospital. There I found 
one of the very large open bay wards with over 50 
patient beds that many of the older teaching hospitals 
featured at the time. Spread across the ward was an 
entire floor of empty iron lungs parked side-by-side 
and end-to-end, a battalion of ghostly shiny metal and 
glass pneumatic tubes large enough to accommodate 
an adult patient—empty and silent. Having seen these 
in pictures (Figure 9-1) or in hospitals when I was much 
younger, I recognized them as life-support devices for 
patients who suffered from paralysis of the diaphragm 
and respiratory muscles.
I asked one of my professors the next day on clinical 
teaching rounds what they were and why they were 
stored upstairs. He told me that they were in preparation for polio patients for whom respiratory assistance 
was life-saving. “Why,” I asked, “were they empty and 
the ward vacant?”
“Because the Salk and Sabin polio vaccines were 
successful,” he answered.
Like Colonel Summers on a different kind of battlefield, it was among my first insights into the distinction 
between tactics and strategy in human medicine. We 
won the war against polio because we elected to invest 
in a strategy of prevention and not simply be satisfied 
with the tactical battle of treating those afflicted with 
this crippling viral infection. Since this early insight, 
I have encountered many other medical and military 
medical decisions that have had a strategic impact on 
the practice of medicine both in uniform and in civilian 
life. Among these were Major Jonathan Letterman’s 
organization of echeloned field medical care during the 
American Civil War; Army Surgeon General George 
Miller Sternberg’s decision to send Major Walter Reed 
to Cuba to identify the vector of yellow fever after the 
Spanish-American War; and more recently, the decision of Air Force surgeons general P.K. Carlton and 
Bruce Green to invest in sophisticated intensive care 
Figure 9-1. Sergeant Clarence Stewart of the 249th General 
Hospital demonstrates an iron lung used to treat poliomyelitis to many interested visitors at the Armed Forces Day 
celebration, Denver, CO, 1960.
Reproduced from: National Library of Medicine (http://
resource.nlm.nih.gov/101442594).
147
Military Medicine in the Operational and Strategic Context
technology in inter-theater air evacuation. These and 
other important decisions by military medical leaders 
changed the complexion of care and survival of service 
members and civilians in war and peace. 
Elsewhere in this textbook (Chapter 3, Officership 
and the Profession of Arms in the 21st Century), Meese 
and Wilson discuss the dual world in which military 
and uniformed medical officers exist: the world of 
medicine and the professional world of the military 
or uniformed officer. Additionally, professional uniformed officers must function in a technical world 
of scientific advances and applications of medical 
practice while serving in a parallel context of analysis 
and decision-making related to the impacts of these 
practices on a hierarchy of social and organizational 
complexity. Several examples above describe how protecting the fighting force from health threats, building 
the physical and emotional dimensions of resilience 
and restoration of health, and maintaining wellness 
and physical fitness are vital elements of ensuring 
a military force capable of defending the nation and 
fighting and winning its wars. The medical officer 
operates simultaneously in three spheres or contexts: 
a tactical context, in which the health of small units is 
protected and medical care is delivered to warriors; an 
operational context, in which battle and theater-level 
health and healthcare issues must be fine-tuned to 
achieve advantages for mission success; and a strategic 
sphere, in which sustainment and restoration of the 
joint fighting force, care of the larger military family, 
and nation-building from the standpoint of public 
health and medical care delivery may impact the national security strategy (NSS) and even national and 
global health. 3(I-7) The medical officer must understand 
his or her role and impact in each of these dimensions. 
Most of this book deals with tactical issues, but in this 
chapter, the concepts of the operational and strategic 
art as they apply to military medicine are introduced.
As a military and uniformed medical officer, your 
career will be filled with moments similar to mine, 
when you encounter the interfaces among the different domains of planning and execution of your duties. 
While a medical officer’s roles may be consumed with 
the day-to-day myriad events that characterize the 
prevention, mitigation, and management of diseases, 
injuries, and combat wounds, they must understand 
how their work and the activities of their team and organization—clinic, operational medical unit, hospital, 
research laboratory, or other—are ideally derivative of 
and support a larger operational and strategic scheme. 
To best gain this understanding, it is necessary to 
step back and consider the role the US military plays 
in national security and defense, and how this role is 
articulated by the national command authority.
THE FOUR INSTRUMENTS OF NATIONAL POWER
Many members of the uniformed services, especially those in the armed forces, are surprised to learn 
that the employment of the nation’s military is but one 
of four different strategic tools by which the United 
States attends to its national security on the world 
stage. Often, the exercise of military power is the least 
desirable and least effective of them. The four instruments of national power form an easily remembered 
mnemonic, “D-I-M-E”3(I-11): diplomatic, informational, 
military, and economic.
The nation’s diplomatic efforts are officially exercised through the authority of Congress to regulate 
diplomatic relations between and among nations and 
largely carried out through the Department of State 
or special emissaries of the legislative and executive branches of government. Diplomatic exchanges 
constitute a continuous form of communications 
that ensure the clarification of national intent behind 
specific actions, the creation of mutual understanding 
for bilateral or multilateral benefit, and expressions of 
displeasure or concern about events or actions taken 
by others. Diplomatic exchanges often take place even 
when the United States or other parties do not have 
formal diplomatic relations; these occur through intermediaries in the diplomatic world or other ad hoc 
devices. 
Information has always represented an essential 
method of influencing international relations and 
events. With the rise of the Internet, social media, sophisticated technological advances in intelligence collection, and nearly universal access to electronic media, 
the informational instrument of national power has 
taken on added importance and complexity. Virtually 
no major development of importance in the security of 
the United States occurs without an effort to influence 
the domestic and international public’s perception of 
these events, as well as to sway the opinions of world 
leaders and powerful influencers. These occur through 
acts of commission—such as releasing heretofore 
privileged or classified information more widely—or 
omission—such as restricting this information. The 
emergence of deliberate and coordinated assailants or 
simply mischievous parties bent on disrupting activities, divulging information, or creating “alternate realities” to deceive or create instability and confusion have 
raised the stakes for protecting sources of information 
and the critical databases and tools for free and easy 
information exchange.
148
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
The War Powers Act of 19734 permits the president 
to exercise certain military actions to protect and 
defend the nation against foreign enemies. But the 
exercise of the military instrument of national power 
has constitutionally resided principally in Congress, 
which, in any event, can leverage the power of the 
purse to limit even presidential directives to employ 
the nation’s military. The most favorable interpretation of this interplay between the legislative and 
executive branches is an exercise of checks and balances. That is, it is a “dialogue” among the branches 
of the federal government intended to promote US 
military intervention as truly reflecting “the will of 
the people”—as is so pointedly demonstrated in the 
opening vignette. It also encourages the greatest 
degree of coordination of resources, expertise, and 
experience among different federal executive departments and agencies (the “interagency”) in conducting 
the four instruments of national power represented 
by D-I-M-E. 
Many of the most effective tools for promoting 
US national interests are economic in nature. Tariffs 
on trading with those the United States intends to 
influence or punish—trade embargoes, confiscation 
of the properties of these nations or their citizens, 
limitations on how US citizens can invest in these 
nations, withholding foreign aid, and other financial 
instruments—are among the oldest and most often 
employed approaches used in international affairs. 
Conversely, favorable relations can be encouraged 
between and among nations that favor one party in 
an international dispute at the expense of the other 
by exercising the opposite of these measures. Both 
approaches—punishing and rewarding—have been 
undertaken throughout American history with great 
success. The emergence of security threats arising 
from non-state actors such as transnational criminal 
elements and terrorist organizations have made 
diplomatic and informational efforts more difficult. 
One of the more recently applied tools in the struggle 
against these enemies is to find and choke off funding 
for their activities.
It should be evident from this discussion with these 
and other examples that the NSS of the United States 
extends beyond the isolated use of its military. In fact, 
the NSS drives the cascading of a strategic discussion 
and the articulation of goals and objectives from all elements of the government—departments and agencies 
alike—including but not limited to the Departments 
of State, Treasury, Commerce, Homeland Security, 
Defense, Justice, Health and Human Services, Veterans Affairs, and Energy; the multifaceted 17-member 
US intelligence community; and all other offices that 
can make important contributions within the D-I-M-E 
framework. The role of the US military is subordinate 
to a larger scale effort to employ a “whole of government approach” for a unified strategy in advancing the 
national interests of the nation. Within the Department 
of Defense (DoD), this is outlined in the National Defense Strategy (NDS) and National Military Strategy 
(NMS), from which all subordinate DoD agencies, 
departments, and commands derive their guidance in 
support of the NSS (see also Chapter 7, The National 
Security Structure).
ROLE OF MILITARY MEDICINE IN NATIONAL DEFENSE
The same relationship exists with respect to the role 
of military medicine in supporting the overarching 
military strategy found in the NMS and reflected in 
derivative guidance provided by the military services, 
the Defense Health Agency, the assistant secretary of 
defense for health affairs, and the secretary of health 
and human services (for members of the US Public 
Health Service). Advancing health within the military 
services, and the wider American public through the 
Public Health Service, and caring for illnesses, injuries, and combat wounds suffered by beneficiaries of 
military healthcare are not ends in themselves. To be 
clear, these are the principal focuses of the uniformed 
services health and healthcare community. But these 
efforts serve a greater good in maintaining the readiness of members of the armed services, and even the 
wider American public, to serve in defense of the 
nation and to keep the nation strong. The health and 
well-being of the uniformed service member (and by 
extension, the US population) is the center of gravity 
of national strength and the readiness of the force to 
defend the nation.
Some within the uniformed health professions find 
this “dual agency” an ethical and moral challenge. This 
chapter is not intended to fully explore this challenge 
(see Chapter 3, Officership and the Profession of Arms 
in the 21st Century, and Chapter 5, Military Law and 
Ethics, for a more complete discussion). Suffice it to 
say that a potential for tension may arise between the 
obligation to care for the individual military patient 
and the duty to ensure the mission of the armed services to fight and defend the country. (This tension 
is not unique to the military physician. Consider, for 
example, the conflict between patient privacy and the 
legal obligation to report sexually transmitted diseases 
to the public health authorities or a battered spouse to 
the legal authorities.) But in the main, these two roles 
and codes of professional ethics—that of the caregiver 
physician and that of the military medical officer—are 
in alignment and without conflict. Optimally caring for 
149
Military Medicine in the Operational and Strategic Context
the service member is, in fact, ensuring the capability 
of the military unit to succeed in its mission, whether 
it is in preventing disease, injury, and combat wounds; 
restoring health; or ensuring full recovery and rehabilitation. Ensuring the optimal restoration of health and 
function in the most seriously ill, injured, or combat 
wounded warrior is critical to retaining the full trust 
and confidence of combatants that the nation and its 
military respect their sacrifices and will not abandon 
them in times of need.
DIMENSIONS OF COMPLEXITY IN LEADER ENGAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATION
Up to this point, this chapter has discussed the notion 
of “strategy” in depth and has used this term liberally. 
But many do not recognize the distinction between 
and among the tiers or dimensions of complexity and 
focus within organizations that engage leaders and unit 
members: strategic, operational, and tactical. Although 
“strategy” was often inferred from the classical texts of 
such conflicts as Caesar’s Gallic Wars and the Second 
Punic War, and it has certainly inspired and informed 
more recent military strategists, its separation into 
political and military elements and the exposition of 
an overarching intent for these conflicts, as distinct 
from more practical activities involved in the waging 
of individual campaigns and battles (operational and 
tactical), is not clear. More explicit discussions of strategy emerged in the 19th century among philosophers, 
political scientists, and military thinkers, such as the previously mentioned Prussian theorist, von Clausewitz. 
The evolution and overlap among these dimensions 
have been changing with the advent of late 20th and 
early 21st century technology, including weapons and 
communications. 5 (The Soviets introduced operational 
art in the 1920s, although the Western European and 
NATO allies used grand tactics until 1982; both communities were working with the same issues raised by 
span of control and communications.) In the simplest 
scheme, these can be considered as vertically arrayed 
one above the other, from the highest and most complex 
dimension that addresses key national goals to the lowest and smallest events and issues:
 
● Strategic. Fundamental, overarching themes 
at the heart of the military medical mission, 
the DoD mission, and by extension, the national defense. Examples: 
 
◦ Force health protection via vaccines, preventive mental health protocols, and food 
and water policies. 
 
◦ Service member accession and retention 
health standards. 
 
◦ Policies governing the standardization 
of the continuum of battlefield casualty 
care (Tactical Combat Casualty Care) and 
recovery from the point of injury to rehabilitation in DoD and Veterans Affairs 
medical facilities (these set the stage for 
clinical, administrative, and business 
practice guidelines at the operational and 
tactical levels.)
 
◦ The impact of military and uniformed 
health policies and healthcare practices on 
national and global health and healthcare 
organization, practice, and metrics.
 
● Operational. Issues that require planning and 
coordinated execution at the larger corporate 
(ie, DoD, service) or major command level. 
Examples: 
 
◦ Harmonizing and aligning theater-level 
immunization and prophylactic medication policies among the services. 
 
◦ Adoption of standardized blood products 
protocols across in-theater medical treatment facilities. 
 
◦ Coordinated clinical, administrative, and 
business practice guidelines across service 
camps, posts, stations, and bases. 
 
◦ Theater patient holding and evacuation 
policies.
 
● Tactical. Practical, local issues or processes 
that address the needs of individual service 
members and build the basis for operational 
and strategic success. Examples: 
 
◦ Details of the administration of individual 
vaccines and patient care at the aid station, 
clinic, hospital, or deployable medical facility level. 
 
◦ Local adjustments of clinical practice 
guidelines to accommodate variations in 
resources, patient flow, provider availability, evacuation policies, etc. 
 
◦ Execution of field sanitation and food and 
water safety standards at the small unit 
level (eg, hand washing, latrine placement, 
water purification steps).
While the appropriate focus of the individual 
student and trainee is on the many details of basic 
science and applied clinical science that will lead to 
their service as well-qualified, safe, and knowledgeable practitioners, it should be recognized that these 
concerns are principally at the tactical level. The ideal 
goal of healthcare provider education is to provide every physician, nurse, and allied healthcare practitioner 
and specialist with the skills needed to conduct optimal 
150
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
health promotion, disease and injury prevention, and 
healthcare at the practitioner-patient interface (the tactical level). No degree of higher order understanding of 
their organizational role can replace the achievement 
of success patient by patient. 
However, in a larger context, the relevance of the 
uniformed medical and public health officer ultimately 
lies in their support of an operational plan that is inextricably linked to the strategic goals of the combined 
military and coalition force. These military goals, as 
discussed above, in turn support an even grander 
scheme of support of the NSS through D-I-M-E. Just 
as every soldier engaged in direct combat, every airman in support of air operations, every sailor ensuring 
the continuous operation of a naval vessel, and every 
Marine trained to conduct amphibious landings cannot succeed alone in achieving the larger mission to 
fight and win the nation’s wars, no one practitioner 
alone can ensure the overarching goals of force health 
protection, or maintaining the fighting strength. These 
require the coordinated and synchronized operational 
actions of a wide array of tactical events and people 
whose combined behaviors support the strategic goals 
of military and federal medicine.
Figure 9-2. Army combat medic Specialist Billie Grimes, 
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Richard Myers (US Air Force), and Army surgeon general Lieutenant 
General Kevin Kiley proudly display the cover of a national 
news magazine featuring Specialist Grimes and her comrades during Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003. This is an 
example of the “strategic corporal” phenomenon in which 
the actions of medical personnel and events at the tactical 
level have strategic impact and implications. (Cover image 
and full story available at: http://archive.defense.gov/news/
newsarticle.aspx?id=27583.)
Figure 9-3. Sergeant Major Brent Jurgersen, US Army, senior 
enlisted advisory to the US Army Wounded Warrior (AW2) 
program, 2007–2009, leading by example as a twice-wounded 
recovering soldier.
Reproduced from: Fort Cason Mountaineer, January 29, 2009.
“THE STRATEGIC CORPORAL”
Having said this, and having aligned the strategic, 
operational, and tactical levels one above the other 
with each supporting the higher level and guided—
ideally—by the strategic goals at the top level, it is 
increasingly clear that crisp separations of one level 
from the other are not always possible. As forecast 
by Jablonsky’s “revolution in military affairs”5 and 
dramatically depicted by former commandant of the 
Marine Corps, General Charles C. Krulak,6 the complexity of modern armed conflict, the impact of technology, and the omnipresence of communications with 
the outside world through cell phones and the media 
has led to the “strategic corporal.” That is to say, the 
tactical has begun to bleed or overlap in increasingly 
more important ways into the higher operational and 
151
Military Medicine in the Operational and Strategic Context
strategic levels, sometimes profoundly enhancing or 
preventing the achievement of strategic goals. 
The improvement or maintenance of health and 
the provision of healthcare play a critical role in this 
phenomenon. Human health and well-being resonates 
strongly with the American public and global audiences. Measures to secure these aims or to demonstrate 
military medicine’s resolve to act ethically, professionally, and with the highest standards of quality 
have great influence on the perception of the public 
about who we are as a US military and federal health 
force. These public audiences are major stakeholders 
in determining both national security interests and the 
degree to which these interests can be advanced. As a 
consequence, the actions—or inactions—of uniformed 
healthcare providers in performing their duties can 
have a dramatic impact on the success of the larger 
military mission and even interagency effort. Figures 
9-2 through 9-4 illustrate some examples of “strategic 
corporals” in recent military medical operations. Each 
represents a strategic message about the contribution 
of the military medical community through the execution of their tactical duties.
Figure 9-4. A combat medic in Afghanistan examining a 
child in a humanitarian operation to improve host nation 
public health. US Army Specialist Joe Kunsch performs 
medical checks on village children during a combat patrol 
in Khowst province, Afghanistan, January 25, 2012. Kunsch 
is a medic assigned to 2nd Battalion, 377th Parachute Field 
Artillery Regiment.
Reproduced from: https://www.defense.gov/Photos/EssayView/CollectionID/9224/.
Figure 9-5. Major (Doctor) Jonathan Letterman (seated, first 
on the left) and his medical staff of the Army of the Potomac. 
Originally printed in Miller’s photo history of the Civil War, 
v. 7, p. 219.
Reproduced from: https://collections.nlm.nih.gov/catalog/
nlm:nlmuid-101436488-img.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
On September 17, 1862, an event occurred that 
changed the course of American history and was 
pivotal to the development of modern military and 
uniformed medicine and US public health (this conclusion is inspired by the comments of Dale Smith, 
PhD, leading the Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences annual terrain walk at Antietam 
National Battlefield, 2012–2017). At the small western 
Maryland town of Sharpsburg near Antietam Creek, 
Union and Confederate forces clashed in a battle with 
the ignominious distinction of creating the largest 
number of casualties in a single day of armed conflict 
in American history—over 23,000 wounded or dead 
federal and Southern soldiers. The military surgeon 
serving as the medical director of the Army of the 
Potomac in that battle (Figure 9-5), Major Jonathan 
Letterman, was a battle-tested, experienced military 
medical officer with over a decade of practice in the 
Indian Wars, as well as on earlier Civil War battlefields. 7 In the few months following his appointment 
as the senior medical officer for his command, he had 
worked diligently to devise a system of evacuation 
teams far forward on the battlefield with evacuation 
by horse-drawn ambulances to larger makeshift facilities in the rear. Antietam was his first opportunity to 
test his system; the battles of Fredericksburg and Gettysburg that followed in 1863 permitted him to apply 
his system more comprehensively and convincingly.
The Battle of Antietam was an encounter noteworthy as one of the earliest “victories” for the Union 
Army, enabling President Abraham Lincoln to publish 
152
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
the Emancipation Proclamation, which freed all slaves 
in the secessionist Confederate States. Lincoln had 
completed the edict earlier but did not issue it, fearing 
that in the absence of any clear Union victory it would 
appear to be an act of desperation. Upon the completion of the battle, Letterman faced a major decision of 
his own. Traditionally educated in the medical care 
principles and practices of the day, as are the healthcare professionals reading this textbook, Letterman 
was fully focused on providing optimal care to his 
individual patients. But Antietam created for him a 
crisis of conscience in which he came to see that he bore 
the responsibility to care for the entire Army—that 
care of the individual soldier rested upon his understanding of how to organize, man, equip, control, and 
provide proximate, continuous, and flexible care that 
conformed to both the ongoing battle and to a uniform 
standard of excellent care for the entire fighting force. 
Letterman’s subsequent creation of the “Letterman 
plan,” completed in October 1862, revolutionized battlefield medicine as well as emergency care for many 
civilian cities following the war. US Navy observers of 
the battle also learned these lessons and applied them 
to maritime and riverine care. Letterman’s insights 
remain some of the most significant in the history of 
healthcare in armed conflict as well as in natural and 
manmade disasters. 
Major Letterman underwent a transformation in 
his thinking that every civilian and uniformed medical officer must undergo if they are to both provide 
the greatest impact for those they serve, and achieve 
the highest level of professional practice. This chapter 
has fully explored and deconstructed the elements 
of that transformation. While medical practice rests 
upon tactical events involved in the promotion of 
health and delivery of care to individual patients, the 
uniformed medical officer is incomplete without an 
understanding of and facility with operational level 
engagements, such as occur on an entire battlefield, 
a major medical treatment facility, or an epidemic or 
natural disaster. Survivors of the battles that followed 
Antietam and Gettysburg took their observations and 
experiences home to cities throughout the country. 
They demanded that their civic leaders emulate the 
Letterman Plan or began their own efforts in urban 
emergency care to duplicate the efficient and effective methods of care delivery they had seen in the 
Civil War. Letterman’s efforts were truly strategic 
in their impact on American and global health and 
healthcare.
Ultimately, the role of military and uniformed medical care in the larger strategic context of defending the 
nation and preserving the health of the public must be 
learned to become a successful and complete medical 
officer. The demands of developing an understanding of human disease and injury and of maintaining 
proficiency in their treatment are often more engaging 
and personally rewarding—at least in the short run. 
But they cannot define the extent of a uniformed and 
military medical officer’s skills. Like Jonathan Letterman, today’s medical officers are challenged to ascend 
to a higher level of understanding and leadership if 
they are to fulfill their aspirations to serve honorably 
and the obligation to reach their full potential. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Summers HG Jr. On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War. New York, NY: Random House; 1982: 1.
 
2. von Clausewitz C. On War. Howard M, Paret P, trans-eds. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1976: 87.
 
3. US Department of Defense. Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States. Washington, DC: DoD; 2013. Joint Publication 1.
 
4. 50 USC Ch 33: War Powers Resolution. http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title50/
chapter33&edition=prelim. Accessed January 3, 2018.
 
5. Jablonsky D. US military doctrine and the revolution in military affairs. Parameters. 1994;autumn:18–36.
 
6. Krulak CC. The strategic corporal: leadership in the three block war. Marines Magazine. 1999;83(1). http://www.au.af.
mil/au/awc/awcgate/usmc/strategic_corporal.htm. Accessed November 13, 2017.
 
7. McGaugh S. Surgeon in Blue: Jonathan Letterman, the Civil War Doctor Who Pioneered Battlefield Care. New York, NY: 
Arcade; 2013.
