203
Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold
Section II
OPERATIONAL HEALTH 
SERVICE SUPPORT 
Section Editor:
James F. Schwartz, LTC (ret), Medical Service Corps, US Army
US Marines with 1st Air Delivery Platoon, Landing Support Company, 1st Marine Logistics Group, prepare blood units in 
preparation of an air delivery at Marine Corps Air Station Yuma, Arizona, March 28, 2018. This training is intended to test 
the viability of dropping units of blood by air to austere environments when ground delivery is not an option. (US Marine 
Corps Photo by Cpl. Kyle McNan)
Reproduced from: https://www.dvidshub.net/image/4284311/air-blood-delivery-with-1st-marine-logistics-group.
204
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
205
Introduction to Health Service Support
Chapter 14
INTRODUCTION TO HEALTH SERVICE 
SUPPORT
JAMES F. SCHWARTZ,* MEGAN C. MULLER,† and CONRAD R. WILMOSKI‡
INTRODUCTION
THE MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM
The Health Service Support Mission
The Role of the Medical Officer on the Command Staff
HEALTH SERVICE SUPPORT PRINCIPLES
Conformity 
Continuity
Proximity
Mobility
Control
Flexibility
A REPRESENTATIVE MEDICAL LAYDOWN IN A JOINT OPERATIONS AREA
RESOURCES
SUMMARY
*Lieutenant Colonel (Retired), Medical Service Corps, US Army; Assistant Professor and Chief of Staff, Department of Military & Emergency Medicine, 
F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
†Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Executive Officer, 264th Medical Battalion, 32nd Medical Brigade, Joint Base San Antonio-Fort Sam Houston, 
Texas
‡Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Sustainment Branch, Concepts and Capabilities Division, Health Readiness Center of Excellence, Capability 
Development Integration Directorate, Joint Base San Antonio-Fort Sam Houston, Texas
206
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Scenario: You recently completed your graduate medical 
education training following medical school and have been 
assigned as the medical officer in a ground combat unit. You 
joined your unit 30 days before it deployed to the theater 
of operation almost 2 months ago. Your unit has been in 
theater for 45 days and has been assigned its first combat 
mission to establish control of a town that has been used by 
the enemy as a safe haven and for smuggling operations. 
Your commander calls together the unit staff and provides 
some initial planning guidance. As the medical officer, it is 
your responsibility to work with the staff and develop the 
health service support (HSS) plan for the upcoming mission. 
How do you undertake this planning?
Providing an answer to this important question, 
this chapter will begin the process by which a new 
military medical officer (MMO) can achieve success by 
protecting and caring for those entrusted to them on 
operational missions, such as the one described above, 
or others across a full—and often unpredictable—spectrum of military and unified operations with a health 
and healthcare support element. It will begin with an 
overview of military HSS by explaining the overall 
mission and composition of the Military Health System 
(MHS); the overall HSS mission as outlined in joint 
and service doctrine1–6; and the multiple roles of an 
MMO within an operational unit. The chapter will then 
further discuss HSS principles, joint medical capabilities, the separate roles of care, and the different forms 
of en route care delivery. Finally, a notional medical 
laydown in schematic form for a joint operations area 
(JOA) is depicted to provide an understanding of how 
medical unit and responsibilities fit within the larger 
operational context.
The principles of HSS and the associated joint medical capabilities are modified and adapted according to 
the particular military operation, geographic and environmental conditions, nature of the enemy, service association for the main operational effort and command (ie, 
Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or interagency or 
coalition operations). By the conclusion of this chapter, 
an MMO should have comprehensive understanding of 
the flexibility, breadth, and depth of HSS.
THE MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM
When an MMO is assigned to a ground combat unit 
(coalition and joint, joint, Army, Marine, or Special 
Operations), their focus is at a tactical level. That is to 
say, the MMO and their fellow uniformed health protection and healthcare professionals will be designing 
a support plan for the sustainment of health, illness 
management, and injury or combat casualty care for a 
discrete number of warrior combatants, usually under 
1,000. The plan will involve a single operation limited 
in time and space to the objective and responsive to the 
enemy’s actions. The MMO will begin by developing 
a solid understanding of the operational environment, 
the health threats and risks associated with the environment, and the medical capabilities supporting the 
mission. But before considering this specific plan, it 
is instructive to have a broader understanding of the 
MHS and what resources are available to the MMO. 7 
In many ways, the planning for this operation began 
much earlier and much farther away from the deployed location.
The MHS is a global, comprehensive, integrated 
system composed of deployed combat and noncombat 
(humanitarian relief, disaster management, national 
event response) contingency medical services; peacetime healthcare delivery; public health services; health 
education and training; medical materiel development 
and medical logistics; and biomedical research and 
development (see “This Is the Military Health System” video in Resources, below). The MHS, which 
includes the services’ medical capabilities, provides a 
continuum of health services from austere operational 
environments through remote, fixed medical treatment facilities to major tertiary care medical centers 
distributed across the continental United States (CONUS). The MHS supports the operational mission by 
fostering, protecting, sustaining, and restoring health. 
All efforts, whether direct preventive services and care 
delivered to the warfighter in the Army, Navy, Air 
Force, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard, or care provided 
to the families of these uniformed personnel or the 
extended military family of retirees and their families, 
are aimed at enhancing the fundamental goal of the 
US military to defend the nation through readiness to 
engage threats to national security at home and abroad. 
Although closely partnered with other federal 
health agencies, the MHS is funded, organized, resourced (staffed and equipped), and controlled 
separately from other executive branch agencies such 
as the Department of Veterans Affairs, Department 
of Homeland Security, Department of Health and 
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, and 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The joint medical capabilities of the MHS are 
grouped under two functional areas: protection and 
sustainment. Protection is the preservation of the effectiveness and survivability of mission-related military 
and nonmilitary personnel, equipment, facilities, information, and infrastructure deployed or located within 
207
Introduction to Health Service Support
or outside the boundaries of a given operational area. 
Force health protection measures promote, improve, 
or conserve the behavioral and physical well-being 
of service members to enable a healthy and fit force, 
prevent injury and illness, and protect the force from 
health hazards. These measures or actions enable 
commanders to deploy a medically ready force to the 
operational environment and protect the force during 
deployment. 
Sustainment encompasses the provision of logistics 
and personnel services, including the health services 
required to maintain and prolong operations until 
the mission is successfully completed. HSS is the 
operationalization of these critical protection and 
sustainment processes, that is, all support and services performed, provided, or arranged to promote, 
improve, conserve, or restore the mental or physical 
well-being of personnel. HSS is the organized system 
of the military’s medical capabilities and resources 
designed to deliver healthcare to the force while in the 
operational environment. 
The Health Service Support Mission 
The key elements of HSS are codified for the entire 
MHS and the military medical force in the Joint Publication 4-02, Healthcare Service Support. 2 This “Joint 
Pub” reinforces the concepts described above, defining 
health service support as: 
All services performed, provided, or arranged to 
promote, improve, conserve, or restore the mental or 
physical well-being of personnel, which include, but 
are not limited to, the management of health services 
resources, such as manpower, monies, and facilities; 
preventive and curative health measures; evacuation of the wounded, injured, or sick; selection of the 
medically fit and disposition of the medically unfit; 
blood management; medical supply, equipment, and 
maintenance thereof; combat and operational stress 
control; and medical, dental, veterinary, laboratory, 
optometric, nutrition therapy, and medical intelligence services. 2
The HSS mission includes casualty management,8–15 
patient movement,16–20 medical logistics, and health 
information management. In outlining the capabilities within HSS, Joint Pub 4-02 recognizes the volatile, complex, and ambiguous nature of 21st century 
armed conflict and health crises. Accordingly, the HSS 
mission supports various operational environments, 
including: 
 
• combat operations;
 
• stability and civil-military operations;
 
• defense support to civil authorities;
 
• limited contingency/civil response;
 
• multinational operations;
 
• Special Operations missions;
 
• operations involving chemical, biological, 
radiological, nuclear, or explosive weapons; 
and 
 
• contractor support. 21–23
The Role of the Medical Officer on the Command 
Staff 
Each service organizes the command staff a little 
differently, but the primary duties of any staff are 
typically the same: supporting the commander; assisting subordinate commanders, staffs, and units; 
and informing units and organizations outside the 
headquarters or immediate circle of the commander 
and the commander’s staff. The command staff typically consists of three staff sections: the coordinating 
staff, special staff, and personal staff. The coordinating 
staff functions are comprised of manpower and personnel, intelligence, operations, logistics, plans, and 
communications. These staff positions are usually 
identified by a shorthand alphanumeric designation 
of the numbers 1 through 9, with a prefix derived from 
the service. Army and Marine Corps units commanded 
by general officers are designated with a “G,” while 
staffs commanded by other commanders, typically 
colonels and lieutenant colonels, are designated by 
an “S.” US Air Force staffs are designated by an “A,” 
and Navy staffs are designated by an “N,” regardless 
of whether they are commanded by a general officer. 
For example, Army battalion personnel functions are 
designated as “S-1,” intelligence as “S-2,” operations 
as “S-3,” sustainment as “S-4,” and so on. 
A special staff officer assists the commander, staff, 
and subordinate units with administrative, technical, or tactical expertise. A personal staff officer has 
a unique relationship with the commander, working 
directly under the immediate control of, and with 
direct access to, the commander. A medical officer 
assigned to a command staff could be designated as 
either a personal or special staff officer, depending on 
the commander. 
Although there are variations at each command 
level, all military medical staff officers have similar 
duties and responsibilities, which focus on the health 
and readiness of the command, health and medical training, 
planning, force health protection, and HSS. Although 
an MMO may never participate in a combat patrol 
or flying mission, they have a critical role in the accomplishment of those missions: ensuring service 
members are healthy and fit to conduct the mission 
(“medically ready”); that unit medical and nonmedical personnel are trained to apply and administer 
208
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
lifesaving first aid; and that a viable, integrated 
medical concept of support addressing all key medical functional areas through all appropriate roles of 
care is planned, trained, and rehearsed in support of 
the mission. 
An MMO’s success as a staff officer hinges on their 
relationship with the commander, fellow staff officers 
and noncommissioned officers, and subordinates. 
Duties are not restricted to day-to-day troop care. 
MMOs must get out of the clinic, participate in unit 
physical training, and attend social events. Success is 
couched in willingness to be a team player; MMOs 
should be willing to do any job asked of them by the 
command (“not my job” should never be part of their 
lexicon). MMOs must do their homework, finding 
out everything they can about the unit—its mission, 
organization, equipment, and operating procedures. 
MMOs must be involved in the decision-making 
process and provide realistic advice and opinions, not 
just information. They must anticipate and forecast 
problems, apply critical thinking to the situation, 
and be prepared with viable solutions. For example, 
monitoring medical operations over the radio, the 
MMO might hear that the supporting forward surgical 
team is overwhelmed with patients just as the unit is 
preparing to conduct a raid. The MMO should alert the 
commander of the risks of the impending operation 
in the event a service member needs forward surgical 
intervention. 
MMOs must also be prepared to lead. An MMO on 
the command staff not only advises the commander 
and assists the staff in all medical areas, but also will 
most likely have the added responsibility of leading 
a staff section, such as a command surgeon section or 
cell, or a medical platoon, element, or department; in 
some cases they may command a medical organization. The MMO will wear many hats and be expected 
to do all of them well; the service members of the 
organization are depending on it.
Lastly, the MMO must realize that they are not 
alone on the staff; the other staff officers and members 
of the team are there to help. Many times the MMO 
will work under the primary staff officer for logistics 
or sustainment during mission planning and provision of organizational support. Some commanders 
may request that the MMO work through the unit 
deputy commander or executive officer, or keep them 
informed of issues. Working on a staff can be a balancing act; it takes time and effort on the MMO’s part to 
develop working relationships and figure out the unit’s 
unique, informal “rules of engagement.” Through it 
all, the MMO has the responsibility to provide the 
best medical advice to the commander, staff, and 
subordinate units. 
HEALTH SERVICE SUPPORT PRINCIPLES
The MMO’s ability to provide effective healthcare 
begins with an understanding of how to integrate 
six basic doctrinal principles, regardless of the setting (whether in a tactical field environment or in 
the traditional “brick and mortar” military medical 
treatment facility [MTF]). As stated in the Prehospital 
Trauma Life Support manual, “principles are those 
things that must be present, accomplished or ensured 
by the health care provider in order to optimize patient 
survival and outcome.”24 The principles, which should 
be considered in all elements of critical thinking and 
planning, are: 
 
1. Conformity. Support the commander’s plan. 
 
2. Continuity. Progressive, phased roles of care.
 
3. Proximity. Right place, right time.
 
4. Mobility. Keep up with the forces.
 
5. Control. Orchestrate medical resources.
 
6. Flexibility. Meet changing requirements.
Each of these six doctrinal principles requires an 
understanding of their constituent elements. For 
example, the principle of continuity requires that the 
MMO understands the different roles of care, and 
the service-specific capabilities and facilities within 
each role. To support continuity, the MMO must also 
understand how patients are moved from one role of 
care to the next, through ground, maritime surface, and 
aerial evacuation, and what en route care is available 
with each mode of transportation. The six principles 
are discussed in detail below. 
Conformity
It is imperative that the HSS plan conforms to the 
commander’s tactical and operational plan (Exhibit 
14-1). The MMO must have a solid understanding of 
the unit’s mission, and how health services can best 
support mission accomplishment. For the MMO, this 
begins even before the unit is assigned the mission; 
as discussed above, MMOs must have a proactive 
working relationship with fellow unit staff officers 
and access to the commander. Once the mission is 
assigned, the MMO must be involved in the earliest 
stages of planning. Early involvement helps ensure 
that the HSS plan will conform to the tactical plan; early 
involvement gives the MMO the greatest chance to 
provide medical influence in the planning; and early 
209
Introduction to Health Service Support
EXHIBIT 14-1
THE CONFORMITY PRINCIPLE IN ACTION: THE DANGERS OF FAILING TO SYNCHRONIZE 
THE MEDICAL PLAN WITH THE OPERATIONAL PLAN 
The U.S. Invasion of Grenada. On 21 October 1983, with the designation of Commander Joint Task Force 120, 
intensive operational planning was begun for Operation URGENT FURY. However, no combat support planners, including medical representatives, were invited to participate. Consequently, no estimate of logistical 
supportability was completed prior to execution, and the required medical support system did not develop. 
The short lead time and the absence of a designated task force surgeon to coordinate medical services at the 
joint level left each service to plan medical support within the scope of its own organic assets, with little or no 
joint coordination of such activities as casualty care management, whole blood procurement, and aeromedical 
evacuation. Erroneous assumptions may have been made as well. For example, the commander of the 82nd Airborne Division was informed that two amphibious ships, United States Ship (USS) Guam (LPH 9) and Trenton 
(LPD 14), which were in the vicinity of Grenada, could provide significant medical and surgical support. The 
record is unclear, but this inaccurate information may have been responsible for his ultimate decision to keep 
Army medical support to a minimum. 
The hostilities lasted ninety-six hours—123 casualties and eighteen deaths were recorded—and brought 
combat wounded to both Guam and Trenton. No significant or sustainable tactical medical asset was established within the combat zone during the hostilities, nor were there triage facilities ashore. Without trained and 
experienced triage corpsmen or officers, casualties were not sent in an orderly and logical flow to the proper 
receiving facilities. There were no established medical communication nets between the Army and Navy, let 
alone with Trenton and Guam; Army helicopter pilots, unfamiliar with the Navy ships and their silhouettes, 
brought casualties to whichever flight deck was most convenient. On several occasions the better-equipped 
Guam was overwhelmed with both minor and lower-priority delayed casualties, while Trenton, which had 
no surgical capability, laboratory, or blood bank, was sent critical casualties. In essence, medical assets were 
squandered and overutilized simultaneously. 
Reproduced from: Smith AM, Bohman HR. Medical command and control in sea-based operations. Naval War College Rev. 
2006;59(3):53–71.
involvement ensures synchronization of medical forces. 
Lastly, once the HSS plan is developed, it should be 
rehearsed with the personnel who must execute it, as 
well as with those the plan will support. 
To begin the HSS plan, the MMO, working with the 
staff, should review any plans and orders, including accompanying annexes and appendices. Orders, whether 
verbal or written, are used to communicate directives 
from the superior to the subordinate command. Orders 
convey the situation, mission, execution, administration and logistics (or sustainment), and command and 
control (or signal) for a specific operation. For example, 
in joint, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force plans and 
orders, specific HSS planning data can be found in the 
administration and logistics paragraph of the base plan 
or order, as well as annexes—Annex C: Operations 
(Force Protection); Annex D: Logistics/Combat Service 
Support; and Annex Q: Medical Services. In Army 
plans and orders, HSS information can be found in 
the sustainment paragraph of the base plan or order; 
in Annex E: Protection; and in Appendix 3 of Annex 
F: Sustainment. Although HSS information is located 
in these key areas, the MMO should review the entire 
plan for specific HSS planning data and tasks.
Continuity
As the MMO begins developing the HSS plan, they 
should analyze the medical capabilities from point of 
injury (POI) or wounding to CONUS-based healthcare; 
in other words, the MMO should look for a system of 
continuity of care. Five overarching joint medical capabilities build this continuum: 
 
1. first responder care, 
 
2. forward resuscitative care, 
 
3. theater hospitalization, 
 
4. definitive care, and 
 
5. en route care. 
Corresponding to these five capabilities are specific 
roles or functions referred to as roles of care (previously 
referred to as “levels” or “echelons” of care, these terms 
have been replaced in joint and coalition parlance to 
“roles of care”). The following is an explanation of the 
joint medical capabilities and corresponding role of 
care. It is important to understand that, as the patient 
progresses through the roles of care, each role possess 
those capabilities and resources found at the lower role; 
210
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
that is, Role 2 includes the capabilities and resources 
found at Role 1 in addition to the enhanced capabilities 
and resources required for Role 2.
First responder care capability, sometimes referred 
to as unit-level care, is defined by time requirements 
and can be divided into three categories: self-aid or 
buddy aid, emergent care, and primary care. The purpose of first responder care is to provide immediate 
care, stabilize the patient, and prepare the patient for 
evacuation to next role of care. Emergent care includes 
hemorrhage control; airway management; intravenous 
access and therapy; oral and intramuscular medications; initial management of penetrating eye injuries, 
fractures, burns, and thoracic trauma (including needle 
and tube thoracotomy); electronic vital sign monitoring; and en route care. Primary care includes physical 
exams, health screening, and treatment of common 
illnesses and minor injuries. Tactical Combat Casualty 
Care (TCCC) procedures are consistent with the first 
responder care capability. 
Organizations and capabilities that are limited to 
first responder care, primary care, and emergent care 
capability are typically designated as Role 1. Examples 
include self-aid/buddy-aid, combat lifesavers, medics, 
corpsmen, and independent duty medical technicians; 
Army medical platoons, medical company treatment 
squads, and ambulance crews; Marine Corps medical platoons, shock trauma platoons, and ambulance 
crews; Air Force squadron medical elements; and 
Navy destroyer, cruiser, frigate, and submarine medical departments. Combat lifesavers are nonmedical 
personnel who have been designated by the command 
to receive additional medical training beyond basic 
first aid. This is an additional duty and does not substitute for the service member’s primary duties. The 
standard is typically one combat lifesaver per crew, 
squad, team, or equivalent size unit. 
A Role 1 tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) 
example is as follows: the medical platoon of a maneuver battalion operates what is commonly known as the 
battalion aid station (BAS). The medical platoon has 
the ability to split into two treatment teams that can 
operate for a limited time in split-based operations for 
close-in support of the maneuver battalion or when the 
BAS must move to a new location.
Forward resuscitative care capability is defined as 
advanced emergency medical treatment performed 
as close to POI as possible; this capability includes 
lifesaving and limb-saving surgical interventions, 
sometimes referred to as “salvage surgical procedures” 
or “damage control resuscitation.” The purpose of 
forward resuscitative care is to provide stabilization to 
achieve the most efficient use of lifesaving and limbsaving treatment. Organizations and capabilities that 
are limited to forward resuscitative care (in addition 
to Role 1 first responder, primary, and emergent care), 
are typically designated as Role 2. Role 2 capabilities 
also include laboratory facilities, radiography, limited 
patient holding, operational dental care, blood products, preventive medicine support, and behavioral 
mental health. Examples of Role 2 medical treatment 
facilities are as follows:
 
• Army brigade support medical company. 
 
• Army medical company (area support). 
 
• Marine Corps medical battalion (surgical 
company).
 
• Air Force expeditionary medical support 
(health response team). 
 
• Air Force expeditionary medical support 
(EMEDS) 10-beds facility.
 
• Navy aircraft carriers (CVN) and amphibious 
assault ships (LHD) have a Role 2 capability 
aboard. 
Another example is the Army forward surgical team 
(however, a 2017 force design update is transitioning the forward surgical team to a new organization 
called the “forward resuscitative and surgical medical 
team”). 
A Role 2 TTP example is the following: the Marine Corps surgical company is designed to support 
regimental-size operations. The company provides 
resuscitative surgery, medical treatment, temporary 
holding, and casualty preparation and evacuation. 
The surgical company consists of a headquarters sections and four surgical platoons. Each surgical platoon 
consists of one forward resuscitative surgery system 
(FRSS), one shock trauma platoon, one radiograph 
unit, one ward, one en route care system (ERCS), one 
ambulance section (consisting of two vehicles), and an 
attached dental platoon. The surgical company should 
be located in close proximity to an airfield capable of 
casualty evacuation by rotary- or fixed-wing aircraft. 
The FRSS may be reinforced with a shock trauma 
platoon to provide an early far-forward resuscitative 
surgery capability.
Theater hospitalization care capability provides 
a full range of healthcare services, including primary 
inpatient and outpatient care; emergent care; and enhanced medical, surgical, and ancillary capabilities. 
Theater hospitalization care is focused on either returning the patient to duty (within the theater evacuation 
policy) or stabilizing the patient for continued evacuation to a definitive care facility. Organizations and 
capabilities that are typically associated with theater 
hospitalization care capability are designated as Role 
3. Examples include:
211
Introduction to Health Service Support
 
• Army combat support hospital. 
 
• Air Force EMEDS (+25 beds). 
 
• Air Force theater hospital. 
 
• Navy hospital ship (T-AH). 
 
• Navy expeditionary medical facility. 
(Note that as with the forward surgical team, the 
combat support hospital will be transitioned to a 
modular field hospital system of components capable 
of expanding from 32 to 240 beds, per the 2017 force 
design update.) The Marine Corps does not possess a 
Role 3 capability and relies on sister services for Role 
3 support.
A Role 3 TTP example follows: Air Force EMEDS 
and theater hospital packages provide treatment 
and holding bed capacity and theater-level medical 
services for deployed forces or specific population 
groups. Their primary mission is to provide forward 
stabilization, resuscitative care, primary care, dental 
services, and force health protection, and to prepare 
casualties for evacuation to the next role of care. The 
modular and scalable design of these packages allows 
the Air Force to deploy medical capabilities ranging 
from small teams that provide highly skilled medical care for a limited number of casualties to a large 
medical system that can provide specialized care to a 
population at risk of over 6,500. EMEDS capabilities are 
grouped into distinct medical support packages that 
provide an incremental buildup of capability: EMEDS 
health response team, EMEDS +10, and EMEDS +25. 
The Air Force theater hospital is built by adding medical specialty and augmentation unit type codes to an 
EMEDS +25 foundation. 
Definitive care capability includes the full range 
of acute, convalescent, restorative, and rehabilitative 
care facilities outside the theater of operations. Definitive care capability is care rendered to definitively 
manage a patient’s condition, which leads to recovery 
and rehabilitation, followed by either return to duty, 
or discharge from the service followed by transition 
to the services of the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
Definitive care capability is available both outside the 
continental United States (OCONUS) and in CONUS. 
Organizations and capabilities that are typically associated with definitive care capability are designated as 
Role 4. Examples include Landstuhl Regional Medical 
Center, located in Germany; Navy Medical Center San 
Diego; and Walter Reed National Military Medical 
Center in Bethesda, Maryland. 
En route care capability involves transitory medical 
care, patient holding, and staging capabilities during 
transport from the POI, wounding, or illness through 
successive roles of medical care, to a medical facility 
that can meet the needs of the patient. Patients are 
moved via a patient movement system, which includes 
surface, ground, and air medical and nonmedical platforms, and the regulating of patients to the appropriate 
medical facility. En route care is typically designated as 
Role 1. The purpose of en route care is the continuation 
of care during movement from first responder care to 
definitive care without clinically compromising the 
patient. En route care involves determining how stable 
a patient is. There are three categories of stability: 
 
1. A stable patient is expected to withstand a 
12-hour intratheater evacuation or a 48-hour 
intertheater evacuation under en route standards of care. 
 
2. A stabilized patient is characterized by a 
secure airway, controlled or absence of 
hemorrhage, adequately treated shock, and 
immobilized major factures. This patient may 
require emergency medical intervention, but 
not surgical intervention, during evacuation. 
 
3. An unstable patient is one whose physiological status is in fluctuation, and emergent 
treatment, surgical intervention, or both are 
anticipated during the evacuation. 
En route care capability can take three forms: 
casualty evacuation (CASEVAC), medical evacuation (MEDEVAC), and aeromedical evacuation (AE). 
MEDEVAC and AE are coordinated and regulated 
by the medical system; CASEVAC is not. CASEVAC 
refers to the unregulated movement of casualties via 
nonmedical maritime surface, ground, or air platforms, typically without onboard en route medical 
care. Because these platforms are unregulated, meaning the evacuation mission has not been coordinated 
by or with the medical community and is technically 
operating outside the casualty management system, 
casualties might not be transported to the appropriate medical facility for the care needed. CASEVAC 
missions are often generated from an opportune of 
lift asset, referring to the practice of repurposing a 
transportation asset once that asset has completed 
its primary mission. For example, a soldier working 
at a remote forward operating base (FOB) has his 
foot crushed by a tactical vehicle. The FOB has Role 
1 capability, a unit-level first responder, but this patient needs at least a Role 2 capability. A helicopter 
just offloaded supplies to the FOB. In this scenario, 
the helicopter provides an opportunity to evacuate 
the casualty to a medical facility that can meet the 
casualty’s medical needs. 
In contrast, MEDEVAC refers to the regulated 
movement of casualties via designated or dedicated 
maritime surface, ground, or air platforms. These 
212
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
platforms have an en route care capability aboard, 
and the patient’s movement has been coordinated to 
match medical needs with facility capabilities. Designated platforms are those with a nonmedical primary 
mission, but that have been selected to provide patient 
movement for a specific time or event. Dedicated 
platforms are specifically designed or configured and 
equipped to conduct MEDEVAC, their primary mission. They are externally marked with the Red Cross, 
and the crews are specifically trained to conduct the 
MEDEVAC mission. All the services have dedicated 
ground ambulances; only the Army has dedicated 
MEDEVAC aircraft. (Note: The Committee on TCCC 
uses the term tactical evacuation, or TACEVAC, to 
identify the movement of a casualty by either CASEVAC or MEDEVAC from the POI to a Role 2 or 3 
MTF. 24) 
Different approaches to medical care and evacuation are always evolving in response to emerging 
challenges in the operational environment. A en route 
care TTP example is as follows: The Marine Corps has 
recently developed the ERCS as a means to bridge 
evacuation between forward resuscitative care and 
theater hospitalization. The ERCS is a modular system 
designed to provide equipment and supplies for the 
care of two critically injured or ill but stabilized casualties for up to a 2-hour MEDEVAC flight onboard 
Marine Corps aircraft.
AE refers to the Air Force system of regulated 
intratheater or intertheater movement of casualties 
between MTFs. AE is typically accomplished via fixedwing assets with onboard en route care provided by 
critical care air transport teams (CCATTs). Note: These 
fixed-wing platforms are not dedicated platforms, but 
designated to conduct specific AE missions. (Refer 
to Annex A to Appendix B of Joint Pub 4-02, Healthcare Service Support, and AFTTP 3-42. 5, Aeromedical 
EXHIBIT 14-2
THE MOBILITY PRINCIPLE IN ACTION 
So medics can go where the warfighters go, 
Mine-Resistant, Ambush-Protected (MRAP) 
ambulances [were] used in Iraq and Afghanistan. . . . with fighting forces deploying these 
new vehicles, the need for an ambulance that 
could accompany them with similar protection 
was evident. Over nine months in 2007 a modified MRAP for ambulance duty was designed, 
developed, tested and produced. 
Reproduced from: MRAP ambulances provide protection, 
“rolling ERs.” US Army website. http://www.army.mil/
article/15552/. Published January 5, 2009. Accessed July 1, 2018.
EXHIBIT 14-3
THE CONTROL PRINCIPLE IN ACTION 
For combat operations in Iraq, the CFLCC [Coalition Forces Land Component Commander] staff was expanded with soldiers, marines, airmen, and allied officers and troops. Shortly after assuming command, [Lt. Gen. 
David] McKiernan welcomed Brig. Gen. George Weightman, Medical Corps (MC), aboard as his (first ever) 
CFLCC Command Surgeon. Almost immediately, Weightman deployed forward to Kuwait to serve in that 
capacity and also as the commander of the 3d MEDCOM [Medical Command] (Forward). Per Joint Publication 
4-02, he was responsible for the planning and execution of the medical support for the operation for that much 
larger patient base that Joint Publication 4-02 defined. He discovered that the initial plan, Operations Plan 
1003V, needed substantial updating and modification as actual combat operations were considered. 
Weightman noticed that the I MEF [Marine Expeditionary Force] did not have any MEDEVAC capability 
and requested augmentation for that purpose. As the CFLCC Surgeon, he had to find the capability for that 
force. Initial planning called for five MEDEVAC units to deploy to support the operation. He resolved to assign 
one to directly support the I MEF when the units arrived (it was one of more than 40 U.S. Army units of varying 
sizes that augmented the I MEF). As he requested necessary medical support units to deploy to the theater, he 
noticed that the Secretary of Defense was delaying his requests. This was a deliberate action because Secretary 
Donald Rumsfeld wanted to push combat units into the theater first, assuming that a campaign quickly initiated and conducted yielded fewer casualties and required less support. However, Weightman continuously 
pushed to bring his medical units forward.
Reproduced from: Whitcomb D. Call Sign – DUSTOFF: A History of U.S. Army Aeromedical Evacuation from Conception to Hurricane 
Katrina. Ft Detrick, MD: Borden Institute; 2012: 255.
213
Introduction to Health Service Support
Evacuation (AE), for a detailed discussion on AE. 
For a complete discussion on the patient movement 
system refer to Appendix B of Joint Pub 4-02. For a 
summation of the joint medical capabilities and roles 
of care, refer to Joint Pub 4-02. Publications are listed 
in Resources, below.) 
Proximity 
Tied closely to the principle of continuity are the 
principles of proximity and mobility. Whereas continuity strives for a seamless continuum of care, proximity 
ensures that access to care is timely and appropriate 
by striking a balance between positioning care as close 
to the supported unit as possible, without jeopardizing the tactical plan or patient care, or overexposing 
the medical asset to operational risks. The tactical 
and enemy situation, the ability to provide command 
and control, operational factors such as evacuation 
time and distance, and the availability of evacuation 
resources all play key roles in determining exactly how 
“proximate” care should be located.
Mobility
As maneuver units move away from their base of 
medical support, the lines of evacuation extend and the 
time to care increases. The principle of mobility (Exhibit 
14-2) ensures that medical elements and units have the 
ability to move personnel and equipment and maintain 
supportable distances to the maneuver units. Mobility also ensures that medical elements and units are 
afforded similar sustainment and survivability protection as that of the maneuver units they are supporting. 
The services have designed most, if not all, Role 1 and 
2 MTFs with the mobility principle in mind, providing 
internal assets to move personnel and equipment, as 
well as assigning similar or identical treatment and 
evacuation platforms to those used in the supported 
maneuver units (eg, an M1126 Stryker combat vehicle 
unit supported by M1133 Stryker MEDEVAC vehicles 
at the Role 1 and 2 MTFs). Although unit design can 
provide the capability to move and ensure protection, 
an effective and efficient evacuation system to rapidly 
move patients to the next role of care is paramount 
to maintaining mobility, specifically for Role 1 and 2 
MTFs. Carrying a patient “forward” ties up transportation assets that would otherwise be used to move unit 
personnel or equipment, and potentially jeopardizes 
the patient’s medical condition. 
Control
The principle of control (Exhibit 14-3) ensures 
medical commanders and command surgeons have 
the authority to tailor and position scarce medical assets where the need is the greatest. Control implies the 
ability to effectively communicate with medical assets. 
It also ensures that the scope and quality of medical 
treatment meet professional standards, policies, and 
US and international law. 
Flexibility
The principle of flexibility ensures that medical 
elements and units are prepared and empowered to 
shift medical resources to meet medical demands and 
patient density across their area of operations. 
A REPRESENTATIVE MEDICAL LAYDOWN IN A JOINT OPERATIONS AREA
Figure 14-1 depicts a representative (notional) mature medical footprint of the joint medical capabilities 
and the distribution of the roles of care across a JOA. 
The scenario is a general overview of treatment and 
evacuation capabilities from POI to Role 4. It helps 
show how an MMO for a deployed combat battalion 
or equivalent ground force would work within the 
overarching medical plan for the entire theater. The 
MMO primarily manages wounds, injuries, and illnesses at the unit level and at the point of combat 
wounding or injury. The combat battalion and its 
medical capabilities are restricted to first responder/
Role 1 (unit level) activities to throughout the discontinuous battle space. 
The diagram does not depict medical infrastructure 
such as medical command and control, dental, preventive medicine, logistics, laboratory, evacuation, and 
veterinary units that would be deployed within the 
JOA. Many of these types of units would be deployed 
along with either Role 2 and 3 MTFs or in the Role 2 
or 3 operational areas. 
The scenario is notional, although it is described 
from the doctrinal perspective. Doctrine provides a 
frame of reference which can be modified as the situation dictates. (The reader should refer to the services’ 
publications for greater detail on the HSS system, 
many of which are listed in Resources, below. Each 
service component develops its medical resources to 
support its service-specific mission, which results in 
the development of different types of organizations 
with varying levels of capability, mobility, and survivability. Although joint medical resources may have 
similar nomenclature to describe the unit, they are not 
usually interchangeable.)
214
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 14-1. Notional medical footprint, point of injury to Role 4.
NOTIONAL MEDICAL FOOTPRINT
ACP Ambulance Control Point
ALP Ambulance Load Point
ARP Ambulance Relay Point
AXP Ambulance Exchange Point
BAS Battalion Aid Station
BES Beach Evacuation Station
CASF Contingency Aeromedical Staging Facility
CCP Casualty Collection Point
CONUS Continental United States
CVN Aircraft Carrier (Nuclear) 
DD Destroyer
EMEDS Expeditionary Medical Support
FF Frigate
H Helicopter Landing Pad
LCAC Landing Craft Air Cushion
LHD Landing Helicopter Dock
MTF Medical Treatment Facility
OBJ Objective
OCONUS Outside Continental United States
POI Point of Injury
R1/2/3 Roles 1/2/3
SS Attack Submarine
SURG Surgical
T-AH Hospital Ship
TMT Treatment
ROLE 2 MTFs
USA Brigade Support Medical Company
USA Medical Company (Area Support)
USAF EMEDS (Health Response Team)
USAF EMEDS +10 Beds
USMC Surgical Company
USN Carrier & USN LHD have R2 
capabilities
ROLE 3 MTFs
USA Combat Support 
Hospital
USAF EMEDS + 25 
Beds
USAF Theater Hospital
USN Hospital Ship
USMC relies on sister 
services
ROLE MTFs
BAS
BAS
BAS
BAS
Corpsman
Corpsman
Medic
OBJ
LION
OBJ
TIGER
AMBULANCE SHUTTLE SYSTEM
Rearward
Forward
Corps Asset
Corps Asset
REAR SUPPORT 
AREA
DD-R1-Capability
T-AH-R3 Capability
LHD-R2 Capability
Theater Hospitalization/R3
Forward Resuscitative/R2
First Responder/R1 (Unit Level)
Theater Hospitalization/R3
Forward Resuscitative/R2
First Responder/R1 (Unit Level)
CASF
Role 3
MTF
US
Airbase
Role 1
MTF
Role 1
MTF
ABBREVIATIONS/ ACRONYMS
Role 3
AUGMENTATION
Role 2/3
AUGMENTATION
Role 2
TMT
AUGMENTATION
Role 2
MTF
Role 1
TMT Team
SPLIT OPS
CASEVAC
(Opportune of Lift)
Role 1
MTF
Role 2
MTF
Ambulance Exchange 
Point Operations
CONUS/ OCONUS
Corps or Division Area
Brigade/Group
Support Area
Battalion
Combat Trains
Company 
Combat Trains
Role 2
MTF
Role 1
MTF
Role 1
MTF
ARPARP
ALP
ALP
ACP
5
2
4
US Fighter 
Base
8
1
3
4
5
6
7
9
10
215
Introduction to Health Service Support
On the far right of the notional medical footprint is 
a ground combat battalion conducting an assault on 
“Objective Lion” (Figure 14-2). The unit has a Role 1 
medical capability and armored ground ambulances 
for ground evacuation. As combat units conduct the 
assault, combat lifesavers and medics/corpsmen assigned to the combat units will provide first responder 
care at the POI (in addition to self-aid/buddy aid). 
Casualties are evacuated from the POI to a casualty 
collection point (CCP). Movement from the POI to 
the CCP is by any means possible—buddy carries, 
drags, litter carries, walking wounded, or vehicles of 
opportunity (CASEVAC). CCPs might not be staffed, 
but they often have a senior medic/corpsman who 
performs triage, treats casualties, and prepares them 
for further evacuation to the unit aid station (Role 1 
MTF). Casualties are evacuated from the CCP to the 
aid station by any means possible, including ground 
ambulances (MEDEVAC) if available; in this case armored ground ambulances. The call for a MEDEVAC 
platform begins with a standardized 9-line MEDEVAC 
request (Exhibit 14-4). Integrating medics/corpsmen 
into the combat units and positioning the aid station 
to provide responsive care to the maneuvering force 
adheres to the principle of proximity.
Recall that Role 1 is to provide immediate lifesaving measures or primary care services; Role 1 does 
not have the ability to properly hold a patient. Also, 
the Role 1 MTF must maintain its ability to move and 
keep up with the maneuvering force—the principle 
of mobility. (Another technique used to ensure both 
proximity and mobility to the maneuver force is for 
the battalion aid station to split into two treatment 
teams and conduct split-based operations). At the aid 
station, the casualty is seen by a physician or physician 
EXHIBIT 14-4
9-LINE MEDEVAC REQUEST 
Line 1. Location of the pick-up site.
Line 2. Radio frequency, call sign, and suffix.
Line 3. Number of patients by precedence.
A: Urgent
B: Urgent surgical
C: Priority
D: Routine
E: Convenience
Line 4. Special equipment required. 
A: None
B: Hoist
C: Extraction equipment
D: Ventilator
Line 5. Number of patients.
A: Litter
B: Ambulatory
Line 6. Security at pick-up site.* 
N: No enemy troops in area
P: Possible enemy troops in area (approach with 
caution)
E: Enemy troops in area (approach with caution)
X: Enemy troops in area (armed escort required)
*In peacetime, list instead number and types of wounds, injuries, 
and illnesses.
Line 7. Method of marking pick-up site. 
A: Panels
B: Pyrotechnic signal
C: Smoke signal
D: None
E: Other
Line 8. Patient nationality and status. 
A: US Military
B: US Civilian
C: Non-US Military
D: Non-US Civilian
E: Enemy Prisoner of War 
Line 9. NBC contamination.*
N: Nuclear
B: Biological
C: Chemical
*In peacetime, instead provide terrain description of pickup site.
Figure 14-2. Casualty movement and treatment, point of 
injury to Role 1.
assistant, sometime referred to as the battalion surgeon 
(in some cases, a Nurse Corps officer may be assigned 
as the battalion surgeon). The physician (or senior 
healthcare provider) decides whether to evacuate the 
patient to a higher role of care or return the patient to 
duty. If the patient requires additional treatment, the 
casualty must be evacuated to a Role 2 or higher. (Note: 
216
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
typically a casualty is referred to as a “patient” once 
the casualty has entered into the medical care system, 
ie, a role of care MTF.) 
Role 1 evacuation assets have responsibility for 
evacuating casualties from areas forward of the Role 
1 MTF and typically do not evacuate beyond the 
Role 1 facility. This ensures the Role 1 evacuation assets remain forward to evacuate casualties from the 
objective to the Role 1 MTF. Evacuation from Role 1 
to Role 2 is the responsibility of the Role 2 MTF: the 
higher role evacuates from the lower role. In the notional 
footprint, the Role 2 MTF has a mix of armored track 
and wheeled ambulances, and has prepositioned and 
collocated the armored track ambulances forward, at 
the Role 1 MTF (Figure 14-3). Again, this reinforces 
the principle of mobility, as well as the concept that 
medical units are afforded similar sustainment and 
survivability protection to that of the maneuver units 
they support. 
A casualty at the Role 1 MTF requiring further 
treatment is loaded onto a Role 2 ambulance (in this 
case an armored track ambulance) for evacuation to 
the Role 2 MTF. Armored ambulances afford good 
crew and patient protection, but tend to be slower 
than wheeled vehicles. In an effort to shorten evacuation time while still affording the protection that 
may be needed in forward areas, the Role 2 MTF may 
establish an ambulance exchange point (AXP). In 
AXP operations, the armored track ambulance and 
wheeled ambulance meet at a designated location to 
exchange the casualty from the track vehicle to the 
wheeled vehicle. Once the exchange is complete, the 
track ambulance returns to the Role 1 MTF, while the 
wheeled ambulance continues the evacuation to the 
Figure 14-3. Patient movement and treatment, Role 1 to 
Role 2.
Role 2 MTF. This technique has the additional advantage of keeping crews familiar with routes, locations, 
and forward or rearward areas. AXPs can also be used 
to transfer a casualty from a ground vehicle to an air 
platform when there are significant antiaircraft threats 
in the forward maneuver areas.
Many Role 2 MTFs can deploy a mobile treatment 
capability, designed to reinforce, augment, or reconstitute the Role 1 capability, in case the Role 1 MTF 
becomes overwhelmed with casualties, needs to relocate, or loses capabilities due to enemy actions. The 
mobile capability may also be positioned at an AXP to 
provide stabilization and treatment and expedite the 
turnaround time for forward ambulances. Likewise, 
some Role 3 facilities can deploy a mobile surgical 
capability forward to augment Role 2 facilities that do 
not have organic surgical capability.
Another technique for employing ambulances is 
the shuttle system (Figure 14-4). Typically established 
when using “like-type” vehicles (eg, all wheeled 
vehicles), the ambulance shuttle system provides an 
efficient means for positioning ambulances where the 
need is the greatest, while allowing for the continuous 
movement of patients between MTFs. As depicted in 
the notional footprint, ambulances are stationed along 
the route between the Role 1 and Role 2 MTFs. As the 
ambulance at the load point receives a casualty and 
begins transport to the Role 2 MTF, the ambulance 
at relay point 1 advances forward to the load point, 
while an ambulance at relay point 2 moves forward 
to relay point 1. If two load points are established, it 
might be necessary to set up an ambulance control 
point to help direct ambulances to specific load points. 
By keeping ambulances dispersed along the route, the 
system also avoids excessive massing of ambulances 
and minimizes the potential loss to enemy actions, particularly in forward areas. The system also simplifies 
Figure 14-4. Ambulance shuttle system.
217
Introduction to Health Service Support
command and control and facilitates administrative 
and maintenance actions.
At Role 2, the casualty receives emergency medical treatment and undergoes advanced resuscitation 
procedures, including damage control surgery (in the 
case of an Army medical company, a forward surgical team must be attached for surgical capability). 
Additionally, Role 2 MTFs provide a patient holding 
capability along with various ancillary services such as 
radiography, dental care, laboratory services, behavioral health, blood products, and preventive medicine. 
With the patient holding capability, patients suffering 
from a soft tissue injury that does not require orthopedic surgery (eg, severe ankle sprain) or moderate 
severity respiratory illness (eg, pneumonia) could be 
held at Role 2 for recovery rather than being sent to 
Role 3. Holding patients at Role 2 keeps them in close 
proximity to their operational unit and expedites a 
faster return to duty. It also keeps specialties and bed 
space open at the Role 3 MTF to handle hospitalization cases. 
A patient will be evacuated from Role 2 to a Role 3 
MTF for further care if (a) the patient does not recover 
in an appropriate amount of time, typically within 72 
hours for many Role 2 MTFs; (b) the patient’s condition 
worsens; or (c) the patient is recovering from damage 
control surgery. Evacuation from Role 2 to Role 3 (Figure 14-5) is typically accomplished by echelon-abovebrigade ground ambulance units (note: Role 3 MTFs do 
not have organic ground ambulance vehicles). At Role 
3, the patient receives a full complement of hospital 
and surgical services. The patient is then returned to 
duty at their operational unit, or stabilized for further 
evacuation to Role 4. 
Figure 14-5. Patient movement and treatment, Role 2 to 
Role 3.
In the notional medical footprint, a Role 2 facility has 
been set up in close proximity to Role 3. In this instance, 
the Role 2 facility will also assume what is commonly 
referred to as an “area support role,” meaning the Role 
2 MTF will provide medical support to units falling 
within a defined area that do not have internal Role 2 
medical support. Typically, all Role 2 and 3 MTFs assume an area support role for basic troop medical care, 
as well as providing some evacuation and specialty 
units such as dental, veterinary, preventive medicine, 
and laboratory. In the notional medical footprint, the 
Role 3 MTF is also “pushing” a medical capability in 
support of outlying units and operations. Most Role 
3 MTFs have the ability to deploy medical capabilities such as trauma response, resuscitative surgery, 
preventive medicine, veterinary services, and casualty 
staging to meet emergent medical needs. The Air Force 
refers to this technique as “hub and spoke operations.” 
(Refer to the services’ doctrinal publications for specific 
Role 3 capabilities.)
In the notional footprint, MEDEVAC aircraft are 
stationed forward in the brigade/group support area. 
These aircraft are assigned the responsibility of clearing casualties from maneuver units in the forward 
areas and transporting them to Role 2 and Role 3. Based 
on the tactical situation, MEDEVAC aircraft may fly as 
far forward as the POI or a CCP for casualty pickup. In 
some situations, when multiple causalities are spread 
across the unit’s maneuver space, the Role 1 MTF may 
be a more beneficial casualty pickup site. 
If a casualty is evacuated from the POI or CCP by 
air (via helicopter or a V-22 Osprey), the MEDEVAC 
or CASEVAC aircraft will bypass the Role 1 MTF and 
proceed directly to the Role 2. Alternatively, transporting the casualty directly from Role 1 to Role 3 may be 
practicable after considering the time and distance 
to the Role 3, the patient’s condition, and the tactical 
situation. Once the casualty is at Role 2, MEDEVAC 
aircraft assigned the responsibility of moving casualties from Role 2 to Role 3 will continue the evacuation 
mission. Additional air ambulance units, typically 
Air Force aircraft augmented with aeromedical crews 
(and CCATTs if needed), transport casualties between 
Role 3 MTFs to provide additional medical or surgical capabilities, to redistribute patient censuses, or to 
free up beds in anticipation of additional casualties 
accompanying a planned or existing combat operation. This patient movement among Role 3 facilities 
also allows for patient staging areas for continued 
strategic evacuation out of the JOA to a Role 4 MTF. 
In addition to moving patients, ground and air 
MEDEVAC platforms can facilitate the movement of 
emergency medical supplies, medical personnel, and 
medical communications. (Refer to ATP 4-02. 2, Medical 
218
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Evacuation, and NTTP 4-02. 2M/MCRP 4-11. 1G, Patient 
Movement, in Resources, below.)
Evacuation from Role 3 to Role 4 MTFs (Figure 14-6) 
is usually accomplished by Air Force fixed-wing aircraft staffed by AE crews; depending on the patient’s 
need, these aircraft may be augmented with a CCATT. 
The evacuation of a patient out of theater is governed 
by the theater patient movement policy, sometimes 
referred to as the theater evacuation policy. This policy 
establishes the maximum number of days a patient can 
be held in theater for treatment prior to further movement or return to duty. The policy takes effect once a 
patient is admitted to a Role 3 facility. In the notional 
scenario, the theater policy is established as a maximum of 7 days. This does not mean a patient must be 
held for 7 days, particularly if the patient will clearly 
be unable to return to duty within the prescribed time; 
in these cases the patient would be moved as soon as 
clinically feasible. 
A shorter theater patient movement policy will 
result in a reduced theater medical footprint (fewer 
beds, specialties, logistics, etc), but a greater demand on patient movement assets and the personnel replacement system. A longer theater patient 
movement policy will result in the opposite. In the 
notional medical footprint, patients are moved to a 
contingency aeromedical staging facility, collocated 
with the Role 3 MTF at the airbase, in preparation 
for movement to Role 4. (If air mobility requirements exceed military resources, the Department 
of Defense may employ the Civil Reserve Air Fleet, 
which employs selected US civilian air carriers, 
through contracts, to conduct the AE mission. Refer 
to the Civil Reserve Air Fleet website and AFTTP 
3-42. 5, Aeromedical Evacuation (AE), in Resources, 
for additional information.) Role 4 MTFs, located 
either OCONUS or in CONUS, provide a full range 
of acute, convalescent, restorative, and rehabilitative 
care with the purpose of rehabilitating, returning to 
duty, or discharging the patient.
During an amphibious operation (Figure 14-7), as 
combat units initially push onto the beach, self-aid/
buddy aid, combat lifesavers, and corpsmen assigned 
to combat units will constitute the first medical response. As combat units progress forward, unit aid 
stations with a physician and additional corpsmen 
will push onto the beach to provide additional first 
responder support. Initially, the wounded are evacuated from the POI to a CCP by any means possible. As 
previously described, a senior corpsman at the CCP 
will perform triage, continue administering treatment, 
and prepare casualties for further evacuation to the 
unit aid station (Role 1 MTF), where the casualty will 
be seen by a physician. 
Evacuation from Role 1 to Role 2 or Role 3 is provided by small boat, LCAC (landing craft, air cushion), helicopter, or V-22 Osprey. These assets may 
be either dedicated, designated, or an opportunity 
of lift. If the casualty is evacuated from the POI or 
CCP by air (helicopter or V-22), the air evacuation 
platform will bypass Role 1 and proceed directly 
to Role 2 or 3. Determining where to evacuate the 
casualty to, Role 2 or 3, depends on numerous factors such as the casualty’s condition, the facility’s 
capabilities, and evacuation time to the MTF. As 
combat units move further inland, a Role 2 MTF 
with surgical capability may be established ashore 
to enhance the proximity of forward resuscitative 
care to the maneuvering force. Once an airhead is 
established, an aeromedical staging facility may be 
set up to transition patients from the Role 3 (hospital 
ship) to a Role 4 definitive care capability. Figure 
14-8 provides an overview of each service’s patient 
flow from POI to Role 4.
Figure 14-6. Patient movement to Role 4.
Figure 14-7. Medical support to amphibious operations.
219
Introduction to Health Service Support
220
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
221
Introduction to Health Service Support
Figure 14-8 (left and previous page). Overview of patient movement flow in each service.
*The ERCS is a modular system that comes equipped with two special medical emergency evacuation device (SMEED) platforms, which are designed to carry patient movement items (eg, oxygen and patient monitoring devices) on board Marine 
Corps aircraft. The ERCS provides equipment and supplies for the care of two critically injured or ill but stabilized casualties 
for up to a 2-hour MEDEVAC flight. The ERCS is staffed by critical care nurses, emergency nurses, and specifically trained 
hospital corpsmen.
AE: aeromedical evacuation
AECT: AE control team
AELT: AE liaison team
AEW: air and space exp wing
AMD: air mobility division
AOC: air operations center
ASF: aeromedical staging facility
ATO: air tasking order
BAS: battalion aid station
BES: beach evacuation station
BSMT: brigade support medical company
CCP: casualty collection point
CVN: Navy aircraft carrier (nuclear)
ERCS: en route care system
FRSS: Forward Resuscitative Surgery System
FST: forward surgical team or fleet surgical team
HN: host nation
IAW: in accordance with
JFACC: joint force air component commander
LF: landing force
LHD/A: landing helicopter dock/assault
MAO: medical administrative officer
MC(AS): medical company (area support)
MRCO: medical regulating control officer
MRT: medical regulating team
MTF: medical treatment facility
OCONUS: outside the continental United States
PAD: patient administration director
PMRC: patient movement requirements center
POI: point of injury
STP: shock trauma platoon
TGRO: TRICARE global remote overseas
TMT: treatment
USAF: US Air Force
Graphic created by Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Education and Technology Innovation Support 
Office. Graphic concept adapted from Navy Tactics, Techniques and Procedures 4-02. 2M/MCRP 4-11. 1, Patient Movement 
(May 2007).
RESOURCES
Doctrine
Policy and practice will change over time. Doctrine, 
that is, published official guidelines and policies, will 
change in content but military references will retain 
their numeric designation. These publications can be 
monitored over time for key principles and practices.
 
• Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Command 
and Control of Joint Air Operations. Washington, 
DC: JCS; 10 February 2014. Joint Publication 
3-30.
 
• Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Healthcare Service Support. Washington, DC: JCS; 26 
July 2012. Joint Publication 4-02.
 
• Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint 
Operations Planning, Washington, DC: JCS; 11 
August 2011. Joint Publication 5-0.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Terms 
and Military Symbols. Washington, DC: HQDA; 
16 November 2016. Army Doctrine Reference 
Publication 1-02.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Medical Evacuation. Washington, DC: HQDA; 25 
October 2016. Army Techniques Publication 
(ATP) 4-02. 2.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Army 
Health System Support to Maneuver Forces. 
Washington, DC: HQDA; 9 June 2014. ATP 
4-02. 3.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Casualty Care. Washington, DC: HQDA; 10 May 
2013. ATP 4-02. 5.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. 
Brigade Support Battalion. Washington, DC: 
HQDA; 2 April 2014. ATP 4-90.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. The 
Infantry Battalion. Washington, DC: HQDA; 
28 December 2017. ATP 3-21. 20.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Army 
Health System. Washington, DC: HQDA; 26 
August 2013. Field Manual 4-02.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US 
Marine Corps. Health Service Support Operations. Washington, DC: USMC; 10 December 
2012. Marine Corps Warfighting Publication 
(MCWP) 4-11. 1.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US 
Marine Corps. Marine Corps Planning Process. 
Washington, DC: USMC; 24 August 2010. 
MCWP 5-1,
 
• Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief of 
Naval Operations. Naval Expeditionary Health 
Service Support Afloat and Ashore. Washington, 
DC: CNO; January 2008. Navy Warfare Publication (NWP) 4-02. 
222
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
• Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief 
of Naval Operations. Navy Planning. Washington, DC: CNO; December 2013. NWP 5-01.
 
• Department of the Navy. Patient Movement. 
Washington, DC: USN; May 2007. Navy 
Tactics, Techniques and Procedures 4-02. 2M/
MCRP 4-11. 1. 
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Medical Operations. Washington, DC: USAF; 29 
September 2015. Air Force Doctrine Document 
4-02.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Aeromedical Evacuation (AE). Washington, DC: 
USAF; 1 November 2003. Air Force Tactics, 
Techniques and Procedures (AFTTP) 3-42. 5.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Expeditionary Medical Support (EMEDS) and 
Air Force Theater Hospital (AFTH). Washington, 
DC: USAF; 27 August 2014. AFTTP 3-42. 71.
Websites
 
• This Is the Military Health System [video]. 
https://youtu.be/USJfvasA6Yk. Published 
May 7, 2013. Accessed September 19, 2018.
 
• US Air Force, Air Mobility Command. Civil 
Reserve Air Fleet. https://www.amc.af.mil/
About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/144025/
civil-reserve-air-fleet/. Published April 26, 
2017. Accessed September 19, 2018.
SUMMARY
An MMO’s success depends on understanding 
of how their duties are tied to the primary need to 
protect soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, and coastguardsmen from injury, illness, and combat wounds. 
MMOs must understand their role within the unit 
commander’s staff as a medical caregiver, medical 
planner, and advisor. The MMO’s partnership with 
their fellow principal staff officers and the trust they 
develop with the commander are paramount. Essential 
to the MMO’s mission success is an understanding of 
and employment of the six principles of HSS; the five 
joint medical capabilities; the four roles of care; and 
three forms of en route care.
 
• The six principles of HSS are conformity, 
continuity, proximity, mobility, control, and 
flexibility. No principle is more important 
than another, and each principle is dependent 
on the other principles to optimize patient 
survival and outcome. 
 
• The five overarching joint medical capabilities 
range from self-aid or buddy aid, to emergent 
care and primary care (first responder care); 
to advanced emergency medical treatment 
performed as close to POI or illness as possible 
(forward resuscitative care); to the full range 
of in-theater healthcare services, including 
primary inpatient and outpatient care, emergent care, and enhanced medical, surgical, and 
ancillary capabilities (theater hospitalization); 
to the full range of acute, convalescent, restorative, and rehabilitative care sites outside the 
theater of operations (definitive care). Tying 
these capabilities together is the en route care 
capability.
 
• Within these overarching joint medical capabilities is a framework that ascribes a specific 
role or function to medical capabilities and 
casualty management resources: the four roles 
of care. Role 1 is unit-level care, and is most 
closely associated with first responder care. 
Role 2 is most closely associated with forward 
resuscitative care. Role 3 is most closely associated with theater hospitalization care, and 
Role 4 is most closely associated with definitive care. Each role possess those capabilities 
and resources found at the lower role.
 
• En route care capability in the patient movement system can take three forms: CASEVAC, 
MEDEVAC, and AE. CASEVAC refers to 
the unregulated movement of casualties via 
nonmedical surface, ground, or air platforms; 
MEDEVAC refers to the regulated movement 
of casualties via designated or dedicated surface, ground, or air platforms; and AE refers 
to the Air Force’s system of regulated intratheater or intertheater movement of casualties 
between MTFs.
REFERENCES
 
1. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States. Washington, DC: JCS; 25 March 
2013. Joint Publication 1.
 
2. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Healthcare Service Support. Washington, DC: JCS; 26 July 2012. Joint Publication 
4-02.
223
Introduction to Health Service Support
 
3. Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. Medical Operations. Washington, DC: USAF; 29 September 2015. Air Force 
Doctrine Document 4-02.
 
4. Headquarters, Department of the Army. Army Health System. Washington, DC: HQDA; 26 August 2013. Field Manual 
4-02.
 
5. Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US Marine Corps. Health Service Support Operations. Washington, DC: USMC; 
10 December 2012. Marine Corps Warfighting Publication 4-11. 1.
 
6. Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. Naval Expeditionary Health Service Support Afloat and 
Ashore. Washington, DC: CNO; January 2008. Navy Warfare Publication, 4-02. 
 
7. MHS Review Senior Oversight and Working Group. Military Health System Review: Final Report to the Secretary of Defense. Washington, DC: Department of Defense; August 2014.
 
8. Beitler AL, Wortmann GW, Hofmann LJ, Goff JM Jr. Operation Enduring Freedom: the 48th Combat Support Hospital 
in Afghanistan. Mil Med. 2006;171(3):189–193. 
 
9. Chambers LW, Green DJ, Gillingham BL, et al. The experience of the US Marine Corps’ Surgical Shock Trauma 
Platoon with 417 operative combat casualties during a 12 month period of Operation Iraqi Freedom. J Trauma. 
2006;60(6):1155–1161;discussion 1161–1164.
 10. Earwood JS, Brooks DE. The seven P’s in battalion level combat health support in the Military Operations in Urban 
Terrain environment: the Fallujah experience, summer 2003 to spring 2004. Mil Med. 2006;171(4):273–277.
 11. Hughes JR, Miller MA, Farr WD, Hughes TM. Survey of US Army commanders’ experiences with brigade/battalion 
surgeons at Fort Hood, Texas. Mil Med. 2006;171(3):240–245.
 12. Lin H, Ancheta A, Uzcategui L, Plurad D. Surgery in expeditionary strike group. Mil Med. 2009;174(3):241–244 .
 13. Murray CK, Reynolds JC, Schroeder JM, Harrison MB, Evans OM, Hospenthal DR. Spectrum of care provided at an 
echelon II medical unit during Operation Iraqi Freedom. Mil Med. 2005;170(6):516–520.
 14. Peoples GE, Gerlinger T, Craig R, Burlingame B. The 274th Forward Surgical Team experience during Operation 
Enduring Freedom. Mil Med. 2005;170(6):451–459. 
 15. Stevens RA, Bohman HR, Baker BC, Chambers LW. The US Navy’s forward resuscitative surgery system during 
Operation Iraqi Freedom. Mil Med. 2005;170(4):297–301.
 16. Beninati W, Meyer MT, Carter TE. The critical care air transport program. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(7 Suppl):S370–376.
 17. Brewer TL, Ryan-Wenger NA. Critical care air transport team (CCATT) nurses’ deployed experience. Mil Med. 
2009;174(5):508–514. 
 18. Clarke JE, Davis PR. Medical evacuation and triage of combat casualties in Helmand Province, Afghanistan: October 
2010-April 2011. Mil Med. 2012;177(11):1261–1266.
 19. Hurd WW, Montminy RJ, De Lorenzo RA, Burd LT, Goldman BS, Loftus TJ. Physician roles in aeromedical evacuation: current practices in USAF operations. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2006;77(6):631–638.
 20. Pizzola JL. MEDEVAC miscategorization. Mil Med. 2010;175(9):655–658.
 21. D’Amore AR, Hardin CK. Air Force expeditionary medical support unit at the Houston floods: use of a military model 
in civilian disaster response. Mil Med. 2005;170(2):103–108. 
 22. Hartgerink BJ, Chapman LE, Stevenson J, Donahue TF, Pagliara C. Utilization of surgical resources during the USNS 
COMFORT humanitarian mission to the Americas, June to October 2007. Mil Med. 2010;175(9):638–646.
224
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 23. Stuart JJ, Johnson DC. Air Force disaster response: Haiti experience. J Surg Orthop Adv. 2011;20(1):62–66.
 24. National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians (NAEMT). PHTLS: Prehospital Trauma Life Support. Military 
8th ed. Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2016: 897.
