405
Spiritual Fitness and Performance
Chapter 28
SPIRITUAL FITNESS AND 
PERFORMANCE
MATTHEW T. STEVENS, MDiv,* and JEFFREY E. RHODES, MDiv, DMin† 
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
MILITARY HISTORY OF SPIRITUALITY AND RELIGION
BACKGROUND
KEY CONCEPTS
Relationship Between Disease, Religion, and Spirituality
Spirituality and Disease
Spirituality and Health and Performance
Spiritual Care for Service Members and Patients
ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Spirituality and the Military Medical Officer 
Guidance to Commanding Officers
SUMMARY
SELECTED RESOURCES
*Commander, US Navy; Director, Pastoral Care Plans/Ops, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, Falls Church, Virginia
†Commander (Retired), US Navy; VA Mental Health and Chaplaincy Department, Durham, North Carolina
406
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
“Total force fitness” (TFF), as discussed in the opening chapter of this section, includes “spiritual fitness” 
as an important component and essential to overall 
fitness. Spiritual fitness (being spiritual) is a broader 
concept than being religious (practicing one’s organized religion), although the practice of one’s religion 
or faith may very well be considered an expression of 
one’s spirituality. The terms “spiritual” or “spirituality” are generally individually focused, contributing 
to personal identity and meaning, whereas “religion” 
is often more corporately focused and refers to specific 
traditions with more defined practices. 
In the TFF initiative, it was recognized that military 
members have built-in stressors that affect all areas of 
their lives, and that eight core domains, including spiritual, needed to be discovered and developed to obtain 
optimal performance. Spiritual fitness in Department of 
Defense (DoD) settings may contribute to the development of resiliency in service members, supporting them in 
routine and rigorous challenges such as arduous training, 
deployments, and combat tours. 1–3 Included in the TFF 
effort are attempts to realize the importance of service 
core values, to understand one’s identity, and to create 
meaning from situations that are often complex and 
sometimes life threatening, including health challenges. 
Service members must be able to apply their service core 
values, and recognize and appreciate the importance of 
a spiritually and religiously diverse force. These basic 
integral components provide the basis for both understanding and developing spiritual fitness in the DoD.
A 2016 Gallup poll indicates that 89% of Americans 
believe in God or a universal spirit. 4 Religious or spiritual beliefs and practices are common among patients 
seeking medical care, and even those who identify 
themselves as nonreligious often see themselves as 
being spiritual. 5 Consequently, this subject is relevant 
to healthcare providers. This chapter will provide a 
basic introduction to spirituality, review the relationship between spirituality and religion, and discuss 
whether healthcare providers who are not ordained 
clergy or chaplains should incorporate spiritual care 
into their overall holistic healthcare treatment plans. 
DEFINITIONS
Many definitions can be offered for spirituality, 
and agreeing upon a common meaning is challenging 
because no one single definition will work for or satisfy everyone. Thus, a broad definition is provided as 
a starting point. Table 28-1 offers some definitions for 
clarity and consistency. Although spirituality includes 
various definitions, a broad range of practices, and a 
plethora of defined spiritual traditions, it is generally 
considered a process and path toward developing the 
aspect of the whole self—a basic tenet of TFF—that 
gives meaning to one’s life (who am I; why am I here; 
what is my purpose?). The spiritual path seeks to provide a sense of transcendence beyond the self and relationships with others. Spirituality can be experienced 
intra-personally (as a connectedness within oneself), 
inter-personally (in the context of others and the natural environment), and trans-personally (referring to a 
sense of relatedness to the unseen, God, or transcendent 
power greater than the self and ordinary sources. 6,7
Koenig and others highlight the impact of spiritual 
practices on health and demonstrate the breadth and 
variance of the appreciation of spirituality. 8,9 Some 
of their key findings from reviewing the literature 
demonstrate a clear relationship between medicine, 
religion, and spirituality. These relationships are important to healthcare providers.
MILITARY HISTORY OF SPIRITUALITY AND RELIGION
Military chaplaincy traces its roots to September 
1775, when George Washington instructed Benedict 
Arnold to “protect & support the free Exercise of the 
Religion of the Country & the undisturbed Enjoyment of the rights of Conscience in religious Matters 
within your utmost Influence and Authority.”10 From 
the earliest days of offering sacramental needs and 
comfort to military personnel ashore and at sea, to the 
current practice of providing comprehensive support 
including personal resilience and wellness, military 
chaplains have always served the multicultural and 
religiously pluralistic US military population in balance with their own religious identity. Today military 
chaplains provide appropriate religious and spiritually 
based care to military personnel and their families, 
often partnering with caregiving professionals from 
other disciplines to ensure optimum support. Beyond 
providing pastoral care, chaplains also advise military 
leaders on issues where religion, ethics, and morale 
may play a role in the decision-making process. Although military chaplains serve as officers in their 
respective branches of service, they are classified as 
noncombatants and restricted from participating directly in hostilities. 11 Military chaplains are supervised 
by their respective service’s (Army, Navy, and Air 
Force) chief of chaplains. 
407
Spiritual Fitness and Performance
TABLE 28-1
SELECTED DEFINITIONS OF SPIRITUALITY
Religion
Involves beliefs, practices, and rituals related to the transcendent, where the transcendent is God, Allah, 
HaShem, or a higher power in Western religious traditions, or to Brahman, manifestations of Brahman, 
Buddha, Dao, or ultimate truth/reality in Eastern traditions. 1
Spirituality
A process and a path people use to discover their inner selves and develop their human spirit. 2
Spirituality
Propensity to make meaning through a sense of relatedness to dimensions that transcend the self in such a 
way that it empowers and does not devalue the individual. 3
Spirituality
A connection to that which is sacred, the transcendent, which is outside of the self, and yet also within the 
self—and in Western traditions is called God, Allah, HaShem, or a higher power, and in Eastern traditions 
may be called Brahman, manifestations of Brahman, Buddha, Dao, or ultimate truth/reality.
Spiritual 
practices
Attendance at religious or spiritual events, meditation, prayer, mindfulness practices, yoga, mantra chanting, spending time alone in nature, recognition of rites of passage, and serving one’s community.
Spiritual 
traditions
Abrahamic examples: Christianity, Islam, Judaism; Eastern examples: Buddhist, Hindu, Zen.
Religious 
care
Helping people maintain their belief systems and organized worship practices. 4
Spiritual 
care
Helping people to identify meaning and purpose in their lives, maintain personal relationships, and transcend a given moment. 4
(1) Koenig HG. Religion, spirituality, and health: the research and clinical implications. ISRN Psychiatry. 2012:278730. (2) Sweeney PJ, Rhodes 
JE, Boling B. Spiritual fitness: a key component of total force fitness. J Force Q. 2012;3rd quarter(66):35–41. (3) Reed PG. An emerging paradigm for the investigation of spirituality in nursing. Res Nurs Health. 1992;15(5):349–357. (4) Emblen JD. Religion and spirituality defined 
according to current use in nursing literature. J Prof Nurs. 1992;8(1):41–47.
BACKGROUND
It is important to know that patients admitted 
to military treatment facilities are routinely asked 
about religious and spiritual needs or concerns 
during initial interviews. If the patient answers 
positively, a consult is automatically generated in 
the patient’s electronic hospital chart, and a member 
of the pastoral care team meets with the patient in a 
timely manner. If the patient does not acknowledge 
a spiritual need or concern to the nurse during this 
initial interview, chaplains at each military treatment facility have varying protocols for following 
up with patients throughout their stay. Chaplains 
remain sensitive to caring for each patient and their 
family regardless of spiritual or faith orientation or 
lack thereof (honoring diversity). The heart of clinical chaplaincy is honoring a person’s belief system 
and nurturing the capacity to maintain that belief 
system while receiving medical treatment. The 
military medical officer (MMO) may need to know 
when a formal referral is needed. 
In the early 2010s, the DoD and Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA) came together to implement a 
“learning collaborative” to integrate mental health and 
chaplain services as a quality improvement effort. 12,13 
As part of this initiative, teams of chaplains and mental 
health providers were encouraged to make improvements in six different areas:
 
1. Screening. Improve practices for screening 
patients for spiritual and mental health 
issues.
 
2. Referrals. Strengthen or develop clearly 
articulated processes for referring patients 
between disciplines.
 
3. Assessment. Develop, improve, and 
ensure standardized use of multidimensional spiritual and mental health assessments.
 
4. Communication and documentation. Establish regular communication practices as 
part of integrated care team meetings, and 
document care and consults.
 
5. Cross-disciplinary training. Champion various multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary 
training opportunities.
 
6. Role clarification. Develop a formal documentation of how mental health and chaplain 
services collaborate.
408
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
KEY CONCEPTS
Different and diverse spiritual traditions encourage 
social participation and mobilize members in support of the community. The DoD, which depends on 
social cohesion and support, is particularly interested 
in this aspect of spiritual fitness. Various forms of 
social support that arise out of spiritual and religious 
participation (including the family, unit, and place 
of worship) can provide powerful protective effects 
in stressful situations. 14 Additionally, studies point 
to positive physical and mental health outcomes and 
better overall coping from practicing one or several 
religious or spiritual activities. 8,9
Relationships Among Disease, Religion, and 
Spirituality 
Multiple studies demonstrate that practicing one’s 
religion or spirituality serves a positive role in treating 
and living with many acute and chronic diseases. 15–30 
Religious faith also appears to be important to many 
patients with serious diseases and serves as a positive coping mechanism. Religion generally influences 
self-care, especially in cases of severe illness; patients 
frequently practice religion and interact with the 
transcendent (God) about their disease state. This spiritual interaction may benefit the patient by providing 
comfort, increasing knowledge about their disease, 
promoting better treatment adherence, and improving quality of life. 31 Overall, the findings suggest that 
integrating systematic assessments of spiritual wellbeing into medical care is crucial, given its importance, 
in particular, to seriously ill patients. Care providers 
need to pay particular attention to whether the patient 
frames their identity as either “religious” or “spiritual” 
because this will influence the care provided. 32 Specifically, patients who describe themselves as spiritual 
but not religious are likely to seek support, meaning, 
and purpose, whereas those describing themselves as 
religious may be more reliant on their trust in a supporting God. 33,34
Balboni et al32 have developed three models for addressing and understanding the integration between 
medical concerns of patients and their religious or 
spiritual identification:
 
1. A generalist specialist model of whole-person 
care with the basic premise that, in a multidisciplinary, intraprofessional care team, 
spiritual care is a foundation of whole-person 
or holistic care.
 
2. An existential functioning model in which 
the care-provider, in the provision of holistic 
care to the patient, understands the dynamic 
relationships among the patient and providers and recognizes emotional, existential, and 
spiritual concerns. 
 
3. An open, pluralist view that affirms the religious, spiritual, and cultural realities of both 
the care provider and patient and recognizes 
the diversity within the healthcare setting. 
Each of these approaches assumes that spirituality 
and medicine should be integrated into the care of the 
patient, and affirms that spirituality must be broadly 
defined, embracing diverse spiritual, religious, secular, 
and cultural perspectives. These approaches ensure the 
spiritual, religious, and cultural concerns of the patient 
and the care provider/interdisciplinary team are addressed. Additionally, all emphasize the importance of 
maintaining ethical professional boundaries to protect 
vulnerable patients from undue influence by religious 
or nonreligious care providers. 32
Spirituality and Disease
A body of evidence15,20,21,28,30,35,36 suggests that certain 
diseases or medical conditions may improve if the 
patient is engaged in religious or spiritual practices. 
These medical conditions range from cancer to headaches to diabetes, and more. Table 28-2 summarizes 
some of the medical conditions being investigated 
and the questions about spiritual/religious practices 
researchers are attempting to answer.
Spirituality and Health and Performance
In addition to disease, spirituality appears to have 
profound effects on well-being, which ultimately impact overall performance in a variety of venues: home, 
work, and life challenges. Importantly, several authors 
have studied the relationship between quality of life 
and spirituality, along with religiosity. Overall, the 
literature supports the idea that having both a sense of 
meaning and purpose in life are positively correlated to 
quality of life. 8,6,9,26,37,38 Likewise, spiritual practices and 
support from a spiritual community appear to confer 
benefits and serve as buffers against stress. Of interest 
is the potential role of spirituality in cognitive function. 
One study found that persons 60 years or older who 
engaged in spiritual activities demonstrated better 
cognitive function than those who did not. 39 Although 
the exact role of spirituality in overall performance is 
not well documented, its potential beneficial effects on 
various mental health attributes and behaviors suggest 
409
Spiritual Fitness and Performance
TABLE 28-2
MEDICAL CONDITIONS BEING EXPLORED IN CONNECTION WITH SPIRITUAL PRACTICES 
Condition
Anticipated Questions
Cancer
Do religious and spiritual practices and beliefs increase the quality of life in cancer patients?1
Heart disease
Does loss of control of one’s physical state significantly impact purpose and meaning in living?2
Does spirituality positively influence recovery from surgery?3
Stroke
Do changes to brain function after a stroke open a door to the divine?4
Headaches
Do techniques such as cognitive-behavioral therapy and relaxation training that take the form of 
spiritual or religious activities influence the onset and duration of headaches?5
Does spiritual meditation have a positive effect in mitigating some of the negative impacts of 
migraines?6
Other chronic 
medical conditions
How does incorporating spirituality into self-management routines impact the health and wellbeing of people with chronic conditions?7
(1) Thune-Boyle IC, Stygall JA, Keshtgar MR, Newman SP. Do religious/spiritual coping strategies affect illness adjustment in patients 
with cancer? A systematic review of the literature. Soc Sci Med. 2006;63(1):151–164. (2) Naghi JJ, Philip KJ, Phan A, Cleenewerck L, 
Schwarz ER. The effects of spirituality and religion on outcomes in patients with chronic heart failure. J Relig Health. 2012;51(4):1124–1136. 
(3) Mouch CA, Sonnega AJ. Spirituality and recovery from cardiac surgery: a review. J Relig Health. 2012;51(4):1042–1060. (4) Mundle RG. 
Engaging religious experience in stroke rehabilitation. J Relig Health. 2012;51(3):986–998. (5) Banks JW. The importance of incorporating 
faith and spirituality issues in the care of patients with chronic daily headache. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2006;10(1):41–46. (6) Wachholtz 
AB, Pargament KI. Migraines and meditation: does spirituality matter? J Behav Med. 2008;31(4):351–366. (7) Unantenne N, Warren N, 
Canaway R, Manderson L. The strength to cope: spirituality and faith in chronic disease. J Relig Health. 2013;52(4):1147–1161.
it can only help. Table 28-3 summarizes the results of a 
review by Koenig9 wherein high-quality studies were 
examined to evaluate associations among religion/
spirituality and well-being and life satisfaction. 
Spiritual Care for Service Members and Patients
Understanding spirituality within the scope of 
caring for service members and patients deserves 
consideration. Emblen6 pointed out that nurses who 
practice together typically have different meanings 
for spirituality, which can cause difficulties. For some, 
spiritual care means helping patients with maintaining 
their religious practices, whereas the intent for others 
may be to help patients understand meaning in times of 
pain and uncertainty. Such confusion over conceptual 
definitions can lead to unmet patient needs due to the 
omission of spiritual care simply based on definitional 
challenges. For example, sometimes patients may indicate they have no spiritual need, meaning no religious 
need (because they are not members of any organized 
religious group), but such patients may desperately 
need help working through transcendent and relationship problems arising from their illness. The distinction 
between religious and spiritual care may be particularly 
helpful to providers in helping patients obtain care in 
connection with either religious accommodation or 
spiritual expression. 6 Exhibit 28-1 lists the basic elements of spiritual care that providers should consider.
In summarizing the challenges of defining spirituality, particularly within the scope of healthcare, 
King and Koenig40 conclude that spirituality is a fluid 
concept without any single, distinct definition, and 
therefore difficult to measure scientifically in research. 
However, to help those interested in understanding spirituality, they propose four areas of focus for 
providers when listening to and caring for patients: 
TABLE 28-3 
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SPIRITUALITY/
RELIGIOSITY AND MENTAL HEALTH AND 
HEALTH BEHAVIORS 
Health Attributes and 
Lifestyle Behaviors
Percentage of Studies Showing 
Positive Correlation
Well-being
82%
Meaning and purpose
100%
Hope
50%
Optimism
73%
Self-esteem
68%
Exercise
76%
Diet
70%
Data source: Koenig HG. Religion, spirituality, and health: a review 
and update. Adv Mind Body Med. 2015;29(3):19–26.
410
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 28-1
FOUR BASIC SPIRITUAL ELEMENTS 
TO CONSIDER IN PROVIDER–SERVICE 
MEMBER/PATIENT RELATIONSHIPS 
 
• Spirit/spirituality (process or sacred journey) 
 
• Spiritual dimension (transcending one’s self; 
meaning-making)
 
• Spiritual well-being (process of being and 
self-understanding)
 
• Spiritual needs (deep inner requirements 
especially in times of distress)
consider one’s own (1) spiritual beliefs, (2) spiritual 
practices, (3) sense of awareness of what is going on 
around the patient, and (4) personal experience. These 
elements form a whole composite necessary for understanding and appreciating spirituality in patients 
receiving care for any type of medical treatment.
ROLE OF THE MILITARY MEDICAL OFFICER 
Spirituality and the Military Medical Officer
The MMO, as a care provider, must appreciate the 
role of spirituality in healthcare as well as understanding how an individual’s spiritual framework may 
impact health and performance. Specifically, they need 
to know when to call in a chaplain. Most healthcare 
providers need additional training in spirituality, 
first to develop active listening skills and become 
clear about their own religious or spiritual beliefs and 
practices, and second to appreciate and address the 
importance of religion and spirituality in optimizing 
a service member’s plan for treatment and recovery. 
The MMO must also develop confidence in addressing 
the religious and spiritual concerns of their patients, 
as needed. 41
A question currently being asked is: should training 
in spirituality be included as a component of medical 
education for optimal care of patients? Studies of medical students indicate the majority believe spirituality 
has a positive impact on patient health (68. 2%), and 
although many want to address spiritual/religious 
concerns, nearly 48. 7% report they are unprepared to 
do so. 42,43 Lack of training on how to integrate religion 
and spirituality into operational and therapeutic settings results in defaulting to chaplains or religious 
specialists,44 which may be fine in a military setting 
where chaplains are certainly trained to do this. Thus, 
whether spiritual training should be a part of medical 
school curricula remains a discussion point. Certainly 
the MMO must be aware of their patient’s needs and 
know when to call in a person specifically trained in 
this area. Moreover, all MMOs should acknowledge 
how their own spiritual and religious beliefs and practices influence the way in which they practice their 
healthcare profession, whatever that may be. 2
Guidance to Commanding Officers
Commanding officers (COs) of military units, medical treatment facilities, and installations must be aware 
they are responsible for the religious and spiritual care 
of service members, patients, and staff through the 
command religious program. Generally, the CO has 
a team—a military chaplain and their staff—to ensure 
that religious services and spiritual care are available 
to and provided for all. However, COs also strongly 
influence the level of collaboration within and across 
units and within the entire healthcare team of providers. The MMO must work with the CO to promote the 
multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary collaboration of 
their teams with other healthcare providers and various leaders. This model of collaboration is supported 
by Gordon and Mitchell,45 who conceived of four competency levels in the delivery of spiritually based care: 
 
1. All staff and volunteers who have casual contact with patients and their families should 
understand that all people have distinguishable spiritual needs.
 
2. All staff and volunteers whose duties require contact with patients and families and 
caregivers should be aware of spiritual and 
religious needs and how to identify and respond to them. 
 
3. All staff and volunteers who are members of 
multi/interdisciplinary care teams need to be 
trained to assess spiritual/religious needs and 
develop plans for care.
 
4. All staff and volunteers whose primary 
responsibility is for the spiritual and religious care of patients, visitors, and staff are 
expected to manage and facilitate complex 
religious and spiritual support for patients, 
families, caregivers, staff, and volunteers. 
Collaborative competency models place religious 
and spiritual provision of care squarely in the multidisciplinary community of care providers rather than 
411
Spiritual Fitness and Performance
in the care of the chaplain only. Chaplains do not own 
religious and spiritual care in DoD or VA settings; 
rather, the MMO and CO can serve key support roles 
by viewing this care as a shared collaborative ownership responsibility for all in leadership positions and 
the healthcare professions. 3
SUMMARY
Definitions of spirituality and religion are challenging and diverse, but it is commonly acknowledged 
that the understanding and practice of spirituality 
is individually based. In contrast, the understanding 
and practice of religion is more of an organized—even 
doctrinal—attempt to connect to others and have an 
understanding of a transcendent being. The overlap in 
this area is large, with some practicing spirituality by 
using a religious framework, and some in organized 
religion viewing that as their spiritual expression. The 
literature supporting the health benefits of practicing 
religion, spirituality, or both, and the role of spirituality and religion in the treatment of common existing 
chronic diseases, have been discussed. It is becoming 
increasingly important for all leaders and healthcare 
providers working in multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary teams to develop active listening skills and 
remain cognizant of their own religious or spiritual 
beliefs and practices. MMOs should be attuned to the 
spiritual concerns of those they care for (as well as 
their own), and not automatically pass this imperative off to the chaplain on the team. All professionals 
on an interdisciplinary team “own” the provision of 
care for the religious and spiritual concerns of their 
patients. And finally, medical treatment facilities and 
clinics that promote interdisciplinary models involving chaplains—including multidisciplinary training—
must promote more holistic care for the patients and 
their families, which will lead to greater opportunity 
for religious and spiritual fitness. 
SELECTED RESOURCES
 
• Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Chairman’s Total Force Fitness Framework. Washington, DC: Department of Defense; September 1, 2011. CJCSI 3405. 01. https://www.hprc-online.org/page/total-force-fitness/
about-total-force-fitness. Accessed June 20, 2018.
 
• The Uniformed Services University’s Human Performance Resource Center has further information on 
the spiritual domain as part of the TFF effort: http://hprc-online.org/. 
 
• Koenig HG. Religion, spirituality, and health: a review and update. Adv Mind Body Med. 2015;29(3):19–26.
 
• Navy Spiritual Fitness Guide: http://www.navy.mil/docs/SpiritualFitnessGuide.pdf.
 
• Pargament KI, Sweeney PJ. Building spiritual fitness in the Army: an innovative approach to a vital 
aspect of human development. Am Psychol. 2011;66(1):58-64.
 
• Realwarriors.net’s spiritual fitness in the military: http://www.realwarriors.net/active/treatment/
spirituality.php.
 
• Sweeney PJ, Rhodes JE, Boling B. Spiritual fitness: a key component of total force fitness. J Force Q. 
2012;3rd quarter(66):35–41.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank colleagues Jason Nieuwsma, PhD; Robert Julian Irvine, MDiv; and Shelia 
O’Mara, MDiv, from the VA Mental Health and Chaplaincy Department in Durham, North Carolina, for 
assistance in reference material and editing. 
REFERENCES
 
1. Hufford DJ, Fritts MJ, Rhodes JE. Spiritual fitness. Mil Medicine. 2010;175(8 Suppl):73-87. 
 
2. Nieuwsma JA, Jackson GL, DeKraai MB, et al. Collaborating across the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense 
to integrate mental health and chaplaincy services. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29(Suppl 4):885–894.
 
3. Sweeney PJ, Rhodes JE, Boling B. Spiritual fitness: a key component of total force fitness. J Force Q. 2012;3rd quarter(66):35–41.
412
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
4. Newport F. Five key findings on religion in the U.S. Gallup Inc website. https://news.gallup.com/poll/200186/fivekey-findings-religion.aspx. Published December 23, 2016. Accessed June 19, 2018.
 
5. Koenig HG. Religion, spirituality, and medicine: research findings and implications for clinical practice. South Med J. 
2004;97(12):1194–1200.
 
6. Emblen JD. Religion and spirituality defined according to current use in nursing literature. J Prof Nurs. 1992;8(1):41–47.
 
7. Reed PG. An emerging paradigm for the investigation of spirituality in nursing. Res Nurs Health. 1992;15(5):349–357.
 
8. Koenig HG. Religion, spirituality, and health: the research and clinical implications. ISRN Psychiatry. 2012:278730.
 
9. Koenig HG. Religion, spirituality, and health: a review and update. Adv Mind Body Med. 2015;29(3):19–26.
 10. Guilday P. The Life and Times of John Carroll, Archbishop of Baltimore, 1735–1815. New York, NY: Encyclopedia Press; 
1922.
 11. Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. https://treaties.un.org/doc/publication/unts/volume 1125/
volume-1125-i-17512-english.pdf. Accessed April 16, 2017.
 12. McKay C, Wieck KL. Evaluation of a collaborative care model for hospitalized patients. Nurs Econ. 2014;32(5):248–
254,267.
 13. Schouten LM, Hulscher ME, van Everdingen JJ, Huijsman R, Grol RP. Evidence for the impact of quality improvement 
collaboratives: systematic review. BMJ. 2008;336(7659):1491–1494. doi: 1410. 1136/bmj. 39570. 749884.BE. Epub 742008 
Jun 749824.
 14. Hobfoll SE. The Ecology of Stress. New York, NY: Hemisphere Publishing; 1988.
 15. Banks JW. The importance of incorporating faith and spirituality issues in the care of patients with chronic daily 
headache. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2006;10(1):41–46.
 16. Gupta PS, Anandarajah G. The role of spirituality in diabetes self-management in an urban, underserved population: 
a qualitative exploratory study. R I Med J (2013). 2014;97(3):31–35.
 17. Gutierrez J, Devia C, Weiss L, et al. Health, community, and spirituality: evaluation of a multicultural faith-based 
diabetes prevention program. Diabetes Educ. 2014;40(2):214–222.
 18. Jim HS, Pustejovsky JE, Park CL, et al. Religion, spirituality, and physical health in cancer patients: A meta-analysis. 
Cancer. 2015;121(21):3760–3768.
 19. Moreira-Almeida A, Koenig HG. Religiousness and spirituality in fibromyalgia and chronic pain patients. Curr Pain 
Headache Rep. 2008;12(5):327–332.
 20. Mouch CA, Sonnega AJ. Spirituality and recovery from cardiac surgery: a review. J Relig Health. 2012;51(4):1042–1060.
 21. Mundle RG. Engaging religious experience in stroke rehabilitation. J Relig Health. 2012;51(3):986–998.
 22. Namageyo-Funa A, Muilenburg J, Wilson M. The role of religion and spirituality in coping with type 2 diabetes: a 
qualitative study among Black men. J Relig Health. 2015;54(1):242–252.
 23. Park CL, Sherman AC, Jim HS, Salsman JM. Religion/spirituality and health in the context of cancer: Cross-domain 
integration, unresolved issues, and future directions. Cancer. 2015;121(21):3789–3794.
 24. Polzer R, Miles MS. Spirituality and self-management of diabetes in African Americans. J Holist Nurs. 2005;23(2):230–250.
 25. Salsman JM, Fitchett G, Merluzzi TV, Sherman AC, Park CL. Religion, spirituality, and health outcomes in cancer: A 
case for a meta-analytic investigation. Cancer. 2015;121(21):3754–3759.
413
Spiritual Fitness and Performance
 26. Salsman JM, Pustejovsky JE, Jim HS, et al. A meta-analytic approach to examining the correlation between religion/
spirituality and mental health in cancer. Cancer. 2015;121(21):3769–3778.
 27. Sherman AC, Merluzzi TV, Pustejovsky JE, et al. A meta-analytic review of religious or spiritual involvement and 
social health among cancer patients. Cancer. 2015;121(21):3779–3788.
 28. Unantenne N, Warren N, Canaway R, Manderson L. The strength to cope: spirituality and faith in chronic disease. J 
Relig Health. 2013;52(4):1147–1161.
 29. Vermandere M, Lepeleire JD, Van Mechelen W, Warmenhoven F, Thoonsen B, Aertgeerts B. Spirituality in palliative 
home care: a framework for the clinician. Support Care Cancer. 2013;21(4):1061–1069.
 30. Wachholtz AB, Pargament KI. Migraines and meditation: does spirituality matter? J Behav Med. 2008;31(4):351–366.
 31. Stewart WC, Adams MP, Stewart JA, Nelson LA. Review of clinical medicine and religious practice. J Relig Health. 
2013;52(1):91–106.
 32. Balboni MJ, Puchalski CM, Peteet JR. The relationship between medicine, spirituality and religion: three models for 
integration. J Relig Health. 2014;53(5):1586–1598.
 33. Bussing A, Matthiessen PF, Ostermann T. Engagement of patients in religious and spiritual practices: confirmatory 
results with the SpREUK-P 1. 1 questionnaire as a tool of quality of life research. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2005;3:53.
 34. Bussing A, Ostermann T, Matthiessen PF. Role of religion and spirituality in medical patients: confirmatory results 
with the SpREUK questionnaire. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2005;3:10.
 35. Thune-Boyle IC, Stygall JA, Keshtgar MR, Newman SP. Do religious/spiritual coping strategies affect illness adjustment in patients with cancer? A systematic review of the literature. Soc Sci Med. 2006;63(1):151–164.
 36. Naghi JJ, Philip KJ, Phan A, Cleenewerck L, Schwarz ER. The effects of spirituality and religion on outcomes in patients 
with chronic heart failure. J Relig Health. 2012;51(4):1124–1136.
 37. Pargament KI, Sweeney PJ. Building spiritual fitness in the Army: an innovative approach to a vital aspect of human 
development. Am Psychol. 2011;66(1):58–64.
 38. Yeung D, Martin MT. Spiritual Fitness and Resilience: A Review of Relevant Constructs, Measures, and Links to Well-Being. 
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2013.
 39. Fung AW, Lam LC. Spiritual activity is associated with better cognitive function in old age. East Asian Arch Psychiatry. 
2013;23(3):102–107.
 40. King MB, Koenig HG. Conceptualising spirituality for medical research and health service provision. BMC Health Serv 
Res. 2009;9:116.
 41. Meredith P, Murray J, Wilson T, Mitchell G, Hutch R. Can spirituality be taught to health care professionals? J Relig 
Health. 2012;51(3):879–889.
 42. Lucchetti G, de Oliveira LR, Koenig HG, Leite JR, Lucchetti AL. Medical students, spirituality and religiosity—results 
from the multicenter study SBRAME. BMC Med Educ. 2013;13:162.
 43. Lucchetti G, de Oliveira LR, Leite JR, Lucchetti AL. Medical students and controversial ethical issues: results from the 
multicenter study SBRAME. BMC Med Educ. 2014;15:85.
 44. Elkonin D, Brown O, Naicker S. Religion, spirituality and therapy: implications for training. J Relig Health. 2014;53(1):119–
134.
 45. Gordon T, Mitchell D. A competency model for the assessment and delivery of spiritual care. Palliat Med. 2004;18(7):646–
651.
414
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
