67
Military Law and Ethics
Chapter 5
MILITARY LAW AND ETHICS
SAMUEL J. SMITH Jr, JD*
INTRODUCTION
THE MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM 
OFFENSES UNDER THE UCMJ 
HOW THE MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM WORKS
COURTS-MARTIAL 
DISCIPLINARY RULES UNIQUE TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE OFFICERS
THE FEDERAL TORT CLAIMS ACT AND THE FERES DOCTRINE
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE JOINT ETHICS REGULATION
SUMMARY
*Colonel (Retired), Judge Advocate General’s Corps, US Army; Deputy General Counsel, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, 
Maryland 
68
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Military service is subject to unique laws, regulations, and policies that limit the rights of military 
personnel and “regulate aspects of the conduct of 
members of the military which in the civilian sphere 
are left unregulated.”1(p750) The US Supreme Court has 
“long recognized that the military is, by necessity, a 
specialized society separate from civilian society,”1(p743) 
which must be ready to fight and win the nation’s 
wars. In order to accomplish its missions, the military 
has an absolute need to “foster instinctive obedience, 
EXHIBIT 5-1
MILITARY LAW DEFINITIONS 
Convening authority. Commanders at various levels who are vested with vast authority in the military justice system. 
Among other responsibilities, convening authorities appoint court-martial panel members (military jurors), decide 
whether to convene a court-martial, and refer charges within their jurisdiction for trial. In certain cases, convening 
authorities have the discretionary authority to set aside findings of guilt and punishments after trial. 
Courts-martial. The military’s three-tiered criminal court system. Generally, minor disciplinary offenses are referred 
to a summary court-martial; misdemeanor-level criminal offenses are referred to a special court-martial; and felony 
level criminal offenses are referred to a general court-martial. 
Defense counsel. A judge advocate who advises and represents a service member accused of an offense under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). An accused service member is entitled to military defense counsel at no 
expense. A military defense counsel must be certified as competent to perform such duties by the service judge advocate general. Service members may hire civilian counsel at personal expense. 
Ethics counselor. An attorney designated or appointed to assist in administering a command or agency ethics program 
and to provide ethics advice to Department of Defense personnel consistent with the Joint Ethics Regulation. 
Good order and discipline. Generally, a condition or state of readiness that facilitates discipline, duty, and obedience to orders in the armed forces. The term, which is not defined in the Manual for Courts-Martial,1 is entrusted to 
experienced military personnel to interpret under the circumstances in keeping with military customs and traditions. 2 
Joint Ethics Regulation. A single source of federal and military ethics standards and ethics guidance for Department of 
Defense personnel, including direction in the areas of financial and employment disclosure systems, post-employment 
rules, enforcement, and training.
Judge advocate. An officer of the Judge Advocate General’s Corps of the Army or Navy, an officer of the Air Force or 
the Marine Corps who is designated as a judge advocate, or a commissioned officer of the Coast Guard designated 
for special duty (law). 
Manual for Courts-Martial. An executive order that implements the UCMJ with procedure, evidentiary rules, guidelines, and resources.
Nonjudicial punishment. Disciplinary proceedings under Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice used by 
commanding officers to address minor offenses.
Staff judge advocate. A designated service judge advocate who serves as the principal legal advisor for the command. Service regulations vary with respect to seniority and responsibilities. Staff judge advocates have a critical 
role in advising convening authorities about potential UCMJ violations before, during, and after each court-martial. 
Trial counsel. A military prosecutor who advises and represents the government in the administration of military 
justice and enforcement of discipline. A military trial counsel must be certified as competent to perform such duties 
by the service judge advocate general. 
Uniform Code of Military Justice. The military’s criminal and disciplinary code. The UCMJ establishes military 
criminal law and procedure and serves as the foundation for the administration of military discipline and justice.
(1) Ghiotto A. Back to the future with the Uniform Code of Military Justice: the need to recalibrate the relationship between the military 
justice system, due process, and good order and discipline. North Dakota Law Rev. 2014;90:485. (2) Parker v Levy, 417 US 733 (1974).
69
Military Law and Ethics
unity, commitment, and esprit de corps.”2 This has led 
to the development of significant differences between 
military law and civilian law. 1 Exhibit 5-1 defines key 
terms used in this chapter.
The military justice system is the foundational 
cornerstone of military law and represents the most 
significant departure from civilian law. A separate 
system is needed to maintain good order and discipline, which are essential for mission readiness, 
efficiency, and effectiveness. 3 In recognition of the 
chain of command’s vital role in leading mission 
accomplishment, commanders have a central role 
in the military justice system1: “No question can be 
left open as to the right to command in the officer, 
or the duty of obedience in the soldier.”4 Medical 
officers in all uniformed services must understand 
that fundamental legal differences apply to them as 
medical professionals serving in or with the military 
and become familiar with their critical roles in the 
military justice system. 
This chapter will familiarize military medical officers (MMOs) with key concepts and issues involving 
military justice and administrative and civil law that 
they will address as military leaders. The chapter begins by examining key aspects of the Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ), which provides the legal 
foundation for the military justice system and serves as 
the primary means for maintaining discipline in the US 
armed forces. The UCMJ serves as a multifaceted military criminal code and a flexible tool for maintaining 
good order and discipline. Next, a detailed explanation 
of how the military justice system works, including the 
roles that MMOs are often called upon to assume in the 
system, is provided. A brief overview of disciplinary 
rules unique to US Public Health Service (PHS) officers 
follows. The chapter then discusses military-unique 
medical malpractice protections under the Federal Tort 
Claims Act (FTCA). The chapter ends with a discussion 
of government ethics laws and requirements specific 
to those in military service, designed to familiarize 
MMOs with standards of professionalism they must 
uphold as leaders. 
Figure 5-1. Cover of the Manual for Courts-Martial. 
US Department of Defense. Manual for Courts-Martial, 
United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016. Reproduced from: http://jsc.defense.gov/Portals/99/Documents/
MCM2016.pdf?ver=2016-12-08-181411-957].
THE MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM
Historical Evolution of the UCMJ
The US court-martial system predates the Constitution, and is thus older than the courts created under 
the Constitution. 5 The Continental Congress adopted 
the first American Laws of War in 1775, based largely 
on the British Articles of War and Naval Articles. 6 
Separate systems developed over time in the Army, 
Navy, and Coast Guard, with differences in both law 
and procedure. In 1948, responding to widespread 
complaints of systemic unfairness and calls for reform 
after World War I and World War II, the Senate Armed 
Services Committee asked the secretary of defense to 
submit a uniform code of military justice to apply across 
all military services in the newly created Department 
of Defense (DoD). 7 
Exercising its constitutional authority to regulate 
the armed forces, Congress enacted the UCMJ in 
1950, bringing all services under one system with 
enhanced due process protections. 8 Sections in the 
UCMJ are referred to as “articles,” vestiges of the 
Articles of War and Naval Articles that served as 
the code’s historical basis. The UCMJ went into effect in 1951 after the president issued the Manual 
for Courts-Martial (referred to as the “Manual,” 
Figure 5-1), an executive order that implements 
the UCMJ by prescribing procedures (under “Rules 
for Courts-Martial”), evidentiary rules (“Military 
Rules of Evidence”), and punishments. 9 The UCMJ 
and Manual are reviewed annually and have been 
regularly updated and revised by Congress and the 
70
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
president. 10 The current edition of the Manual includes explanatory materials published by the DoD 
in conjunction with the Department of Homeland 
Security, and is supplemented by service regulations.
 Jurisdiction: Those Covered by the UCMJ
Jurisdiction is covered in Article 2 of the UCMJ. Active duty military personnel are subject to the UCMJ 
at all times, even while off duty or in a leave status. 11 
Other military personnel covered by the UCMJ at all 
times include cadets, aviation cadets, midshipmen, 
military prisoners serving a court-martial sentence, 
and prisoners of war. Reserve personnel are subject 
to the UCMJ only during active duty service periods 
and while in federal service on inactive duty training 
(Exhibit 5-2). 12 National Guard personnel are subject 
to the UCMJ only while serving in a federalized status; 
at other times they are subject to state law variations 
of the UCMJ. 
Retired personnel of the regular components and 
members of the Fleet Reserve and Fleet Marine Corps 
Reserve are subject to the UCMJ. However, retirees 
from the reserve components are covered only when 
receiving hospital care from the armed forces. Medically retired service members are also subject to the 
UCMJ. Courts have long upheld UCMJ jurisdiction for 
those on the Temporary Disabled Retired List. 13,14 In 
2015, the Navy Marine Corps Court of Appeals found 
that jurisdiction also exists for those on the Permanent 
Disabled Retired List (Exhibit 5-3). 15 
PHS officers are subject to the UCMJ when assigned 
to and serving with the armed forces. 16 In this regard, 
the Public Health Service Act provides that “[o]fficers 
detailed for duty with the Army, Air Force, Navy, or 
Coast Guard shall be subject to the laws for the government of the service to which detailed.”17 As a result, 
except in time of war or declared emergency, the policy 
of the Department of Health and Human Services is to 
detail a PHS officer to the armed forces only with that 
officer’s informed consent and acknowledgment that 
the UCMJ will apply. 18 
Given an increasing reliance by the US military 
on civilian personnel and contractors, it should be 
noted that certain groups of civilians serving with or 
accompanying the armed forces in the field in times 
of war or contingency operations are also subject to 
the UCMJ. However, under DoD policy, when offenses alleged to have been committed by civilians 
violate federal laws, the Department of Justice must 
be notified and offered the opportunity to exercise 
jurisdiction. 19 The Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction 
Act20 confers federal criminal jurisdiction for felony 
offenses committed abroad by federal employees and 
contractors supporting DoD missions. Several other 
groups are potentially subject to UCMJ jurisdiction, 
including prisoners of war in the custody of the armed 
forces (consult with your servicing military legal office 
when questions arise about jurisdiction). 
EXHIBIT 5-2
RESERVE JURISDICTION 
In United States v Phillips,1 Patricia Phillips, a nurse serving as a lieutenant colonel in the Air Force Reserve, was 
ordered to active duty for 2 weeks of annual training in July 1999. On July 11th, Phillips traveled from her home in 
Pennsylvania to Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio for the training, checked into visiting officer quarters, and 
knowingly consumed brownies laced with marijuana. 
Phillips unsuccessfully tried to get another officer to provide a substitute urine sample for a urinalysis held the following week. The urinalysis detected marijuana usage, and Phillips was later convicted at a general court-martial of 
making a false official statement (Article 107), wrongful use of marijuana (Article 112a), and conduct unbecoming an 
officer (Article 133). She was sentenced to 45 days in confinement and dismissal from the service. 
Phillips argued that jurisdiction was lacking because she consumed the marijuana on July 11th and annual training 
did not technically start until July 12th. The courts rejected her contention, noting that she traveled on orders, occupied government quarters, and received travel reimbursement on July 11th. 
(1) United States v Phillips, 58 MJ 217 (CAAF 2003). 
71
Military Law and Ethics
EXHIBIT 5-3
MEDICALLY RETIRED PERSONNEL 
The following two cases illustrate UCMJ jurisdiction over medically retired personnel. In 1994, Hospital Corpsman 
Third Class Walter Stevenson was discharged from the Navy and placed on the Temporary Disabled Retired List 
(TDRL) following recommendations of a Physical Disability Evaluation Board. Stevenson was awarded a 30% disability rating, which entitled him to receive military retired pay. However, after the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA) found him to be 100% disabled, he waived military pay in order to receive a higher amount from the VA. 
Three years later, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service identified Stevenson, then living in Tennessee, as a 
suspect in the rape of a military family member in on-base housing in Hawaii in 1992. Stevenson was convicted 
at a general court-martial of rape (Article 120) and was sentenced to 3 years of confinement and a dishonorable 
discharge. The military trial and appellate courts found that the military retained an interest in good order and 
discipline for those on the TDRL because their disabilities are not permanent and they remain subject to recall. The 
Supreme Court declined to hear the case. 1 
Jurisdiction was also upheld in the court-martial of Charles Reynolds, a retired Marine first sergeant on the Permanent Disabled Retired List (PDRL). While on active duty, Reynolds joined a biker gang in violation of Department 
of Defense instructions. In January 2014, he conspired with two other Marines in the gang to assault a third Marine 
and participated in the assault. Two days later he was placed on the TDRL and transferred to the Fleet Marine 
Corps Reserve. Reynolds waived military retired pay in favor of higher payments from the VA. Later that year he 
physically assaulted his girlfriend. 
In September 2015, Reynolds was placed on the PDRL, and continued to waive military pay in favor of VA compensation. The secretary of the Navy ordered Reynolds’s apprehension and confinement in late 2015 and authorized the 
exercise of court-martial jurisdiction over him. He was convicted of failure to obey a lawful general regulation (Article 92), conspiracy to commit assault (Article 80), and assault (Article 128) and sentenced to 270 days in confinement and a bad conduct discharge. In upholding jurisdiction over him, the Navy Marine Corps Court of Appeals 
relied upon his retired status, entitlement to retired pay, and the fact that he was not exempt from recall to active 
duty. The court distinguished Reynolds’s retired status from those who are completely discharged from service. 2 
(1) United States v Stevenson, 53 MJ 257 (CAAF 2000), cert denied 555 US 816 (2008). (2) United States v Reynolds, No. 201600415 (NMCMR 
2017).
OFFENSES UNDER THE UCMJ 
UCMJ offenses (Articles 80–134) can be broadly 
grouped into three categories: “civilian” offenses, 
“uniquely military” offenses, and military “catchall” 
offenses. 
“Civilian” Offenses
The UCMJ contains a wide range of “civilian” 
offenses commonly found in federal and state civilian criminal codes. These offenses include drunken 
or reckless operation of a vehicle, aircraft, or vessel 
(Article 111); wrongful use, possession, or distribution of controlled substances (Article 112a); murder 
(Article 118); rape and sexual assault (Article 120); and 
larceny (Article 121). Service members can reasonably 
be expected to understand that such acts are criminal 
in nature.
The potential exists for jurisdictional conflict and 
duplicative investigation and prosecution given that 
the UCMJ’s “civilian” offenses mirror those in federal 
and state criminal codes. Although the Constitution21 
and the UCMJ22 prohibit double jeopardy, courts have 
interpreted that prohibition to limit only successive 
prosecutions by the same sovereign government under the “dual sovereignty doctrine.”23,24 Since federal 
and military authorities fall under the same federal 
sovereign, both cannot prosecute the same offense. 
Pursuant to interagency agreements with the Justice 
Department, most offenses involving DoD and Coast 
Guard service members on military installations or 
involving military operations are left to the military 
to investigate and prosecute. 3 However, matters of national significance are jointly investigated, and allegations of corruption are reserved for federal authorities. 
States are separate sovereign governments and can 
prosecute offenses within their jurisdictions regardless 
of military prosecution, subject to state laws. However, 
the mere fact that actions occurred within a state does 
72
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
not necessarily confer jurisdiction on the state. In 
some cases, a state has no jurisdiction over an alleged 
offense if the act occurred on a military installation or 
facility that has exclusive federal jurisdiction. In other 
cases involving uniquely military offenses, there is no 
applicable state law. Protections against successive 
prosecutions are also found in military regulations 
that require high-level approval to prosecute a service 
member for the same offense previously tried in state 
courts. 25(ch4) 
Foreign courts generally have jurisdiction over 
crimes committed by US service members in other 
countries. However, the exercise of foreign jurisdiction is often limited by status-of-forces agreements, 
treaties, or other bilateral agreements with the United 
States, which normally confer primary jurisdiction on 
US military authorities. Nonetheless, such agreements 
can generate intense political discord in the host nation and erode public will, particularly when heinous 
crimes are committed by US personnel in the host nation involving host nation victims. Such incidents can 
threaten the stability of an alliance, which could result 
in a decision by military authorities to turn a service 
member over to host nation authorities. 26 
“Uniquely Military” Offenses
A second subset of UCMJ articles proscribe a number of offenses unique to military service for which 
there is no civilian equivalent. For example, whereas 
a civilian employee who misses work may be subject 
to adverse personnel actions, a service member who 
misses duty is subject to corrective training, administrative actions, progressive discipline, and even 
criminal penalties under the UCMJ. Similarly, unlike 
a civilian employee who does not commit a crime 
by publicly saying contemptuous things verbally or 
on social media about the company’s chief executive 
officer, a commissioned officer who uses contemptuous words against the president, the vice president, 
Congress, the secretary of defense, the secretary of 
a military department, the secretary of homeland 
security, or the governor or legislature of any state, 
commonwealth, or possession in which he or she is on 
duty or present faces possible criminal sanctions under 
the UCMJ. The fact that “uniquely military” offenses 
may not be obvious to those entering military service 
is one of the reasons that UCMJ training is required 
upon a service member’s initial entry into duty and 
periodically thereafter. 27 
This category of offenses includes, among others, 
absence without leave (Article 86); missing movement 
(Article 87); contempt toward officials (Article 88); 
disrespect toward a superior commissioned officer 
(Article 89); assaulting or willfully disobeying a superior commissioned officer (Article 90); insubordinate 
conduct toward a warrant officer, noncommissioned 
officer, or petty officer (Article 91); failure to obey an 
order or regulation and dereliction of duty (Article 92); 
cruelty and maltreatment (Article 93); mutiny or sedition (Article 94); misbehavior before the enemy (Article 
99); aiding the enemy (Article 104); misconduct as a 
prisoner (Article 105); spies (Article 106); espionage 
(Article 106a); false official statements (Article 107); 
drunk on duty (Article 112); malingering (Article 115); 
conduct unbecoming an officer (Article 133); fraternization (Article 134); gambling with a subordinate (Article 
134); and wearing unauthorized insignia, decoration, 
badge, ribbon, device, or lapel button (Article 134). 
Article 92 of the UCMJ merits special examination 
because it incorporates three broad categories of offenses with clear significance for MMOs. First, Article 
92 makes it an offense to violate or to fail to obey a lawful general order or regulation. Such orders and regulations are issued by a general court-martial convening 
authority, general, or flag officers in command, or are 
published at the service level. Knowledge of these orders and regulations is presumed, and therefore lack of 
knowledge is not a defense. This prohibition subjects 
service members to innumerable requirements generally related to standards of conduct and performance 
of duty. For example, many sections of the Joint Ethics 
Regulation (JER),28 discussed at the end of this chapter, 
which exist to preserve the integrity of government 
operations by setting standards of conduct, are punishable as violations of Article 92. Likewise, participation 
in extremist organizations violates service regulations 
and is punishable under Article 92, UCMJ. 29,30
Second, Article 92 makes violations of lawful orders 
punishable under the UCMJ. Such orders are issued 
directly by an individual that the service member has 
a duty to obey (Exhibit 5-4). This usually occurs within 
a service member’s chain of command, and could even 
arise in the context of medical treatment. For example, 
violation of an order to receive an immunization is 
subject to punishment under Article 92, UCMJ. 30 
Finally, Article 92 includes dereliction of duty as 
an offense, which potentially raises complex issues 
in the medical context. The offense is described as 
follows: “A person is derelict in the performance of 
duties when that person willfully or negligently fails 
to perform that person’s duties or when that person 
performs them in a culpably inefficient manner.”3 This 
means that cases involving medical error potentially 
violate Article 92. This presents a friction point between 
professional self-regulation within military medicine 
and the UCMJ (Exhibit 5-5).
73
Military Law and Ethics
EXHIBIT 5-4
FAILURE TO OBEY A LAWFUL ORDER 
In 2010, Lieutenant Colonel Terrence Lakin, an Army doctor with over 17 years of service, refused to deploy for a 
second tour of duty to Afghanistan due to his belief that then-President Obama was not born in the United States. 
Although the president had publicly released a copy of his birth certificate, Dr Lakin was unconvinced and felt the 
orders to deploy were not valid as a consequence. Another Army doctor had to deploy in Lakin’s place with little 
notice. 
Dr Lakin, a flight surgeon who formerly served as chief of medicine at the Army’s Pentagon health clinic, ultimately 
pled guilty at a general court-martial to failing to obey a lawful order to deploy to Afghanistan (Article 92). The doctor who had to deploy in Lakin’s place, and that doctor’s wife, also an Army doctor, testified in sentencing proceedings about the difficulties the unexpected deployment caused them. Dr Lakin apologized, asked to remain in service 
and pledged to deploy in the sentencing phase of his court-martial. Nonetheless, he was sentenced to 6 months’ 
imprisonment and dismissal from the service. Dr Lakin lost any military retirement as a result. 1 
(1) Hemmerly-Brown A. Lakin discharged, sentenced to six months. Army News Service. December 17, 2010. https://www.army.
mil/article/49601/Lakin_discharged__sentenced_to_six_months/. Accessed November 20, 2017.
EXHIBIT 5-5
DERELICTION OF DUTY 
Army Captain Michael Hamner, an anesthesiologist, pled guilty at a general court-martial in 2001 to false official 
statements regarding the administration of an antibiotic to a teenage patient who died in his care prior to routine 
surgery. At the time of the incident, in 1998, Hamner was a 3rd-year resident at the Walter Reed Army Medical 
Center. 1 Hamner was found guilty of dereliction of duty (Article 92) for improperly administering the antibiotic to a 
teenage patient and making false statements about the events. Hamner was sentenced to a dishonorable discharge. 2,3
(1) ABC News. Father seeks justice for daughter’s Army hospital death. ABCnews.go.com. November 22, 2004. http://abcnews.
go.com/GMA/Health/story?id=272801&page=1. Accessed November 20, 2017. (2) Associated Press. Ex-Walter Reed doctor convicted in fatal malpractice case. Seattle Times. December 15, 2001. http://community.seattletimes.nwsource.com/archive/?date=200
11215&slug=doctor15m0. Accessed November 20, 2017. (3) United States v Michael G. Hamner, No. 07-166, No. 07-0203/AR, petition 
for review denied (CAAF June 5, 2007).
Military “Catchall” Offenses
The UCMJ includes significant “catchall” offenses 
not specifically covered elsewhere in the UCMJ 
through Article 134’s General Article, including all 
disorders and neglects to the prejudice of (ie, those that 
cause a reasonably direct and obvious injury to31(p682)) 
good order and discipline in the armed forces (Article 
134, Clause 1 [Exhibit 5-6]) all conduct of a nature to 
bring discredit upon the armed forces (Article 134, 
Clause 2); and certain state laws made applicable under the Federal Assimilative Crimes Act (Article 134, 
Clause 3). These broad “catchall” categories may not 
be used when a more specific offense listed in Articles 
80 through 132 applies. 
A detailed discussion of every punitive article is 
beyond the scope of this chapter. More information can 
be obtained from local servicing legal offices and the 
Manual for Courts-Martial, which provides detailed 
information about each offense in Part IV, including 
an explanation, a listing of the elements, and reference 
to any lesser included offenses. 3
War Crimes 
The law of armed conflict is established through 
international treaties and customary international 
law. The Geneva and Hague Conventions (discussed 
in Chapter 6, The Law of Armed Conflict and Military 
Medicine) establish the core of what is commonly 
referred to as the “law of war.”32 However, it is left to 
states party to those conventions to investigate and 
prosecute violations under domestic law. 
The UCMJ is the primary means by which the US 
74
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
EXHIBIT 5-6
CONDUCT UNBECOMING AN OFFICER AND CONDUCT PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDER 
AND DISCIPLINE 
Howard Levy, a dermatologist from Brooklyn, New York, was drafted during the Vietnam War. His active duty service as an Army captain was delayed until he completed a civilian residency. While serving as the chief of dermatology at the military hospital at Ft Jackson, South Carolina, Levy refused an order to provide a course of instruction 
for Special Forces medics on dermatologic problems that might be encountered in the course of their counterinsurgency duties. Additionally, Levy publicly stated his opposition to the war, encouraged enlisted personnel not to 
participate in the war, and urged them to disobey orders, stating in part, “If I were a colored soldier I would refuse 
to go to Viet Nam and if I were a colored soldier and were sent I would refuse to fight. Special Forces personnel are 
liars and thieves and killers of peasants and murderers of women and children.”1 
Levy based his refusal on his view of medical ethics and opposition to the war. He believed that Special Forces 
medics were primarily soldiers, and therefore any medical instruction he gave them would contribute to the war 
effort. As a physician, he felt providing this instruction would be unethical behavior. He was convicted of failure to 
obey a lawful order (Article 90), conduct unbecoming an officer (Article 133), and conduct prejudicial to good order 
and discipline (Article 134). Levy was sentenced to dismissal from the service, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, 
and 3 years of confinement at hard labor. Levy challenged the constitutionality of his convictions in federal court, 
claiming in part that the charges were vague and overbroad, and that the First Amendment protected his speech. 
Although a federal appeals court ruled in Levy’s favor, the Supreme Court reversed the opinion and reinstated his 
convictions and sentence.
(1) Parker v Levy, 417 US 733 (1974).
prosecutes war crimes. 33 In some cases, such crimes are 
charged as specific UCMJ offenses, such as murder or 
rape. In others, suspected offenses are charged as conduct unbecoming an officer, and/or conduct prejudicial 
to good order and discipline. The federal criminal code 
can also be assimilated in charging war crimes for acts 
involving torture, genocide, terrorism, and certain uses 
of chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons. Those not 
subject to the UCMJ may be prosecuted under the War 
Crimes Act,34 the Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction 
Act,35 and other applicable sections of the federal 
criminal code (Exhibit 5-7).
The United States is not a party to the Rome Statute, 
a treaty that established the International Criminal 
Court (ICC), which became a permanent international 
criminal court in 2002 after ratification of the statute 
EXHIBIT 5-7
WAR CRIMES PROSECUTIONS 
In 2006, four soldiers from the 101st Airborne Division got drunk, left their guard post near Baghdad, entered a 
nearby home, and raped a 14-year-old girl. One of them, Private First Class Steven Green, then shot and killed the 
girl, her sister, and her parents in their home and set the girl’s body on fire. Green was discharged from the service 
before the four were linked to the crime. The other three soldiers were convicted at military courts-martial of rape 
and murder and sentenced to lengthy sentences under the UCMJ. However, since Green had separated from the 
service the UCMJ did not apply. Later in 2006, Article 3(a) of the UCMJ was changed to provide jurisdiction over 
former service members. Instead he was tried and convicted in federal court under the War Crimes Act, a federal 
law that allowed the former soldier to be charged under federal civilian law. Green was sentenced to life in prison 
without parole, and a federal appeals court upheld his conviction. 1,2 
(1) United States v Steven D. Green, 654 F3d 637 (6th Cir 2011). (2) Frederick J. When a soldier murders: Steven Green gets life. Time. 
May 21, 2009. http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1900389,00.html. Accessed November 20, 2017.
75
Military Law and Ethics
by 120 nations. The ICC was created to investigate and 
prosecute individuals “only if the State concerned does 
not, cannot or is unwilling genuinely to do so.”36,37 The 
court asserts jurisdiction over persons for the crimes 
of genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes. 
The United States rejects assertions of jurisdiction over 
US personnel by the ICC, although it maintains observer status and supports certain functions of the ICC. 
HOW THE MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM WORKS
Command Discretion
Commanders have prosecutorial discretion under 
the UCMJ to determine how to handle alleged offenses 
under their authority. In this respect, commanders are 
charged with exercising their independent judgment, 
free from unlawful command influence by more senior 
commanders directing an outcome. 38 In most cases, the 
ultimate authority to dispose of more serious offenses, 
or those involving senior personnel, is withheld to 
higher level commanders. 3(p401),39 Only commanders 
with authority to convene courts-martial or administer nonjudicial punishment have authority to finally 
dispose of allegations. 3 
Commanders have a wide range of options for dealing with alleged offenses. A basic tenet of the military 
justice system is to handle alleged offenses “at the lowest appropriate level.”3 The Manual for Courts-Martial 
lists a number of significant factors for commanders 
to consider in this regard, “including, to the extent 
practicable, the nature of the offense, any mitigating 
or extenuating circumstances, any recommendations 
made by subordinate commanders, the interests of justice, military exigencies, and the effect of the decision 
on the military member and the command. The goal 
should be a disposition that is warranted, appropriate, and fair.”3 The decision must be made with the 
advice and counsel of a judge advocate, an assigned 
military lawyer. 
In most cases, medical commands fall under the 
ultimate UCMJ authority of a regional or command 
general court-martial jurisdiction administered by an 
operational unit commander. Jurisdiction is usually 
withheld to higher levels of command for allegations 
involving officers and senior enlisted personnel. Nonetheless, in many cases senior medical commanders 
are authorized to dispose of offenses. Even if medical 
commanders are not authorized to handle a case, the 
rules for court-martial give a service member’s chain of 
command an opportunity to recommend an appropriate disposition for an alleged offense. This is significant 
because the chain of command closest to the service 
member will have the best information to properly 
characterize the service member’s service record and 
rehabilitative potential, can best address any impacts 
of an alleged offense on the mission, and can point to 
other pertinent information. 
Reports of UCMJ Violations
Allegations of UCMJ offenses come from a variety of sources, with varying levels of detail. Some 
reports originate outside the military, from civilian 
law enforcement or private citizens. Most allegations, 
however, rise through the chain of command based 
on direct observation within the military community. 
Investigations by military police and military criminal 
investigators are another frequent source of allegations of wrongdoing. In some cases, military medical 
personnel may be the first to discover signs of physical 
or other abuse in the course of their duties and may 
have an obligation to report the findings. 
When handling these allegations, as in all situations involving potentially conflicting professional 
obligations, the MMO should seek guidance. For more 
information about authorizations or obligations to 
disclose protected health information for purposes 
of law enforcement or public health activities, consult with the local Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) or privacy compliance 
office, medical ethics office, or servicing legal office. 
Documents to consult include the following:
 
• 45 CFR, Part 164. 512(k)(1), Uses and disclosures for which an authorization or opportunity to agree or object is not required; 
 
• DoD Regulation 6025. 18-R, DoD Health Information Privacy Regulation (January 2003); 
 
• DoD Instruction 6490. 08, Command Notification Requirements to Dispel Stigma in Providing 
Mental Health Care to Service Members (August 
17, 2011); and
 
• DoD Directive 6400. 06, Domestic Abuse Involving DoD Military and Certain Affiliated Personnel 
(August 21, 2007).
Military healthcare providers have special reporting obligations relating to reports of sexual assault 
received from service members and adult military 
dependents. 40 In such cases, military healthcare providers must immediately notify designated military 
sexual assault response coordinators or sexual assault 
prevention and response victim advocates, who will 
advise the victim regarding restricted and unrestricted 
reporting options. Additionally, when restricted 
76
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
reports of sexual assault are first made at a military 
medical treatment facility, military medical personnel 
are relieved from state and local mandatory reporting 
obligations to law enforcement, except when necessary “to prevent or mitigate a serious and imminent 
threat to the health or safety of an individual.”41 Only 
unrestricted reports are forwarded for investigation 
and reported to the chain of command. (However, 
when MMOs work off-duty for nonmilitary healthcare 
organizations, state and local requirements do apply 
and vary by state.) 
Upon receiving a report alleging a UCMJ violation 
by a member of the command, a commander must 
consider the information, circumstances, and any 
applicable legal requirements before determining the 
next steps. Information should be obtained from the 
chain of command and consultation made with the 
servicing judge advocate. Depending on the allegation, immediate notification may need to be made to 
military criminal investigators (eg, sexual assault allegations, cases involving possible harm to persons, and 
those involving damage to or compromise of facilities, 
equipment, or systems). 
Even though service members are presumed innocent until proven guilty, protective measures may be 
required or appropriate pending further investigation 
and resolution of the allegations. In some cases, in 
order to safeguard personnel, a commander may need 
to issue a “cooling off” order requiring that a service 
member reside in on-base government quarters, limit 
pass privileges, and/or have no contact with an alleged victim. In other cases, a commander may need 
to temporarily move a service member’s place of duty 
in order to avoid possible confrontations. It may be 
appropriate to temporarily restrict access to weapons 
and other dangerous materials. In the most extreme 
cases that present a danger to the service member or 
others or a possible flight risk, it may be necessary to 
pursue pretrial confinement. All such cases carry legal 
significance that could affect the outcome of the case. 
For example, certain forms of restriction may trigger 
speedy trial requirements. 42,43 As a result, such measures must only be undertaken after consultation with 
the servicing judge advocate. 
Protective measures may also be required or appropriate to protect government facilities, equipment, 
and information systems as an interim measure while 
additional facts are obtained. Allegations of a UCMJ 
violation may compel notification to information security personnel in order to protect information systems 
and classified information. To safeguard the integrity 
of government programs, it may be necessary to “flag” 
the service member and suspend favorable personnel 
actions while additional information is gathered and 
considered. Service regulations may require notification through human resources personnel channels to 
suspend favorable actions involving service members 
on a promotion list, selected for command, pending a 
change in duty station, or on retirement orders. 
Investigations
The commander has a duty to gather “all reasonably 
available evidence bearing on guilt or innocence and 
any evidence relating to aggravation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.”3 The circumstances will dictate the appropriate means and manner of inquiry or investigation. Commanders should consult with their servicing 
judge advocate for advice and counsel and to ensure 
legal compliance. 
Low-level offenses may warrant no more than a 
request for information or statements from the service 
member’s chain of command. More serious offenses 
should be referred to criminal investigators or investigated under service regulations by an investigating 
officer (referred to as an “AR 15-6” [Army Regulation 15-6]44 investigation in the Army, a “JAGMAN” 
[Manual of the Judge Advocate General] investigation in 
the Navy and Marine Corps,45 a command-directed 
investigation in the Air Force,46 and administrative 
investigation in the Coast Guard47). Some allegations 
require special processing. For example, regarding 
sexual assault allegations, military criminal investigators will coordinate with sexual assault response 
coordinators and handle all aspects of investigating 
the allegations. 40 
Mental Health Evaluations and Sanity Boards
MMOs specializing in psychology and psychiatry 
may be asked to evaluate the mental health of service 
members under investigation for alleged UCMJ offenses. This usually occurs when a service member 
accused of an offense is believed to either lack mental 
responsibility for any offense48 or lack the mental 
capacity to stand trial. 49 However, given the growing 
number of traumatic brain injuries and posttraumatic 
stress disorders experienced by service members since 
the attacks of September 11, 2001, mental health evaluations may already be underway in connection with 
fitness for duty and disability evaluations, which run 
concurrently with military justice proceedings. 
Sometimes a forensic inquiry into mental responsibility or capacity takes place prior to a commander’s 
decision to prefer (formally initiate) charges under 
Rule for Courts-Martial 307 and may lead to a decision 
not to prefer charges. Usually, however, a court-martial 
convening authority orders qualified medical person77
Military Law and Ethics
nel to conduct a “sanity board” and to prepare detailed 
findings about the service member’s mental condition 
after charges have been preferred. 50 Such findings help 
to inform the commander’s decisions about the case, 
but do not compel an outcome.
Administrative Actions
Based upon the facts and circumstances, a commander may determine that an offense is best dealt 
with outside the traditional criminal justice context. 
In some cases, it may be appropriate to take no action 
based on the results of an inquiry or investigation that 
fails to establish wrongdoing. In many cases, it may 
be prudent to handle minor offenses progressively 
through a range of administrative actions, such as 
corrective training, counseling, revocation of pass 
privileges, admonition, censure or reprimand, and 
bar to reenlistment. 45 
Letters of concern or caution are occasionally used 
as a “wake up call” to underscore departure from 
accepted standards and encourage improvement. Essentially a formalized counseling statement, a letter 
of concern or caution does not, in and of itself, have 
long-term consequences. Rather, it is intended to rehabilitate the service member, and it is not permanently 
filed in official personnel records. 45,51 Nonetheless, the 
underlying factual basis for the letter may be reflected 
in performance evaluations. 45,52 
Letters of reprimand are commonly used to memorialize more serious actions or omissions that reflect 
poorly on a service member’s “leadership ability, 
promotion potential, morals, and integrity.”53 Such 
unfavorable information is considered pertinent to 
future personnel decisions that may result in selections for positions of public trust and responsibility, 
leadership positions, and continued service. 
In some cases, reprimands must be issued for certain 
actions. For example, in the Army, driving while intoxicated or impaired or refusing to take a breathalyzer 
test requires an administrative reprimand regardless of 
any punitive actions. 54 The letter of reprimand process 
is streamlined, and the standard of proof is preponderance of the evidence. Service members must only be 
given notice and an opportunity to respond prior to 
final decisions on imposition and filing. In most cases, 
administrative reprimands can only be permanently 
filed in a service member’s official personnel files if 
directed by a general, a flag officer, or a general courtmartial convening authority. 
Service members may also be administratively 
eliminated from military service for a variety of reasons, including misconduct, professional dereliction, 
unsuitability for service, and conduct unbecoming 
an officer. 55–57 The government’s standard of proof 
is lower in such cases than at courts-martial, and the 
rules of evidence generally do not apply. However, 
service members retain certain administrative due 
process rights in these cases, such as the right to present evidence and to be heard when an unfavorable 
discharge is possible. For example, medical evidence 
and testimony is often presented when the defense 
contends that an underlying medical condition caused 
or contributed to the actions or omissions that led to 
the administrative elimination action and supports 
retaining the service member. Additionally, when 
administrative elimination is warranted, the separation 
authority must determine whether the service member’s service should be characterized as “honorable,” 
“under honorable conditions,” or “under other than 
honorable conditions.” This characterization impacts 
eligibility for veterans’ benefits, including medical 
benefits, and may affect the service member’s future 
employment prospects.
Nonjudicial Punishment
Article 15 of the UCMJ offers an opportunity to 
resolve allegations of minor UCMJ violations through 
a disciplinary, nonjudicial measure that is more serious than corrective administrative actions but less 
serious than a court-martial. 3 Governed in part by 
service regulations, nonjudicial punishment is commonly referred to as an “Article 15” in the Army and 
Air Force, a “captain’s mast” in the Navy and Coast 
Guard, and “office hours” in the Marine Corps. It is 
generally appropriate for offenses that do not carry 
the possibility of a dishonorable discharge or more 
than 1 year of confinement. 3 Unless authority has been 
withheld by a senior commander or by law or service 
regulation, it falls within a commander’s discretion 
to determine whether nonjudicial punishment is appropriate in a given case after considering a number of 
factors, including the nature of the alleged offense, the 
service member’s record, the need for good order and 
discipline, and the effect of nonjudicial punishment on 
the service member and the service member’s record. 
Once a commander decides to go forward with nonjudicial punishment proceedings, he or she must notify 
the service member of the intent to proceed, specify 
the alleged UCMJ violation involved, provide evidence 
showing that a violation occurred, and inform the service member about their applicable rights, including 
the right to consult with defense counsel. If the service 
member demands a trial by court-martial, nonjudicial 
punishment proceedings must be terminated unless 
the service member is attached to or embarked on 
a vessel, in which case they do not have this option. 
78
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
When a service member “turns down” nonjudicial 
punishment, the commander must decide whether 
to pursue a court-martial or to handle the situation 
through other means. A service member’s decision not 
to demand trial by court-martial reflects a decision to 
allow the commander to determine guilt or innocence, 
and if the service member is found guilty, to determine 
the appropriate punishment. 
The service member can elect personal appearance at a hearing to present evidence in defense, extenuation, and mitigation both orally and in writing; 
request and question witnesses; and, in many cases, 
have a spokesman present. The chain of command is 
typically present at such hearings. The commander 
must consider all evidence presented and determine 
whether the service member committed one or more 
of the UCMJ violations alleged. 
Significantly, the standard of proof to be found 
guilty varies by service for nonjudicial punishment. 58 
The evidence must establish guilt by a preponderance 
of evidence (more likely than not) in the Navy, Marine 
Corps, and Coast Guard. 45,59 In the Army, the evidence 
must establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. 25(para316d4) The Air Force presently has no express standard 
of proof, but refers commanders to the beyond-areasonable-doubt standard at courts-martial, and 
suggests that nonjudicial punishment is inadvisable 
when the evidence fails to meet this standard. 60 If the 
commander concludes that the service member did 
not commit an offense according to the service-specific 
standard, the proceedings are terminated. If the commander concludes that the service member did commit 
an offense, the service member must be notified of the 
finding, the punishment imposed, and the right to appeal. This usually occurs at the time of any hearing.
Depending on the rank of the service member and 
the rank of the imposing commander, punishments 
can include extra duty, restriction, bread and water 
(for junior Navy enlisted personnel on vessels), reprimands, forfeitures of pay (up to half of one month’s 
pay for 2 months), and reduction in rank for enlisted 
personnel. 61 Field-grade and higher commanders 
are authorized to impose greater punishment than 
company-grade commanders. To incentivize rehabilitation, a commander may suspend any portion 
of the punishment on the condition that the service 
member not commit any further violation during the 
period of suspension. Suspended punishments are 
automatically remitted upon successful completion 
of a probationary period. However, further misconduct during the period of suspension empowers 
the imposing commander to summarily vacate the 
suspension. 
Those found guilty have the right to appeal any 
finding of guilt, the punishment imposed, or both, to 
the next higher commander. On appeal, a commander 
can set aside a finding of guilt and reduce the punishment if deemed appropriate. Once final, the record of 
nonjudicial punishment is filed in the service member’s 
personnel file in accordance with service regulations, 
which can have considerable long-term consequences 
for assignment, promotion, and retention in service. 
Most MMOs will have significant roles in the nonjudicial punishment process at some point during their 
service. Some will discover and report offenses, or they 
may conduct inquiries or investigations into reports 
of misconduct that serve as the basis for UCMJ action. 
Those in non-command supervisory positions will be 
called upon to recommend to command authorities 
whether nonjudicial punishment proceedings are 
appropriate for those under their supervisory authority. Others will be called upon to appear in person or 
by writing at a hearing to provide facts relevant to 
innocence, guilt, or punishment. A select number in 
command positions will administer nonjudicial punishment or decide appeals. 
COURTS-MARTIAL
Preferral of Charges
Preferral of charges is the first step in the courtmartial process. It involves a formal, written description 
of alleged UCMJ violations in a manner required by the 
Manual for Courts-Martial. Any person subject to the 
UCMJ can prefer charges, and in so doing must, under 
oath, state that the signer “has personal knowledge of 
or has investigated the matters set forth in the charges 
and specifications and that they are true in fact to the 
best of that person’s knowledge and belief” (Rule for 
Courts-Martial 307(b)). 3 In most cases, charges are 
preferred by a service member’s company level UCMJ 
commander after reviewing the investigation into the 
matter and consulting with the servicing judge advocate. Once preferred, charges are served on the accused 
service member and are immediately forwarded to the 
next higher commander for forwarding to the summary 
court-martial convening authority. 
Levels of Courts-Martial
Summary courts-martial are at the lowest level. 
They apply only to enlisted personnel, are heard by 
one appointed officer rather than a military judge or 
panel members, have abbreviated procedural and 
79
Military Law and Ethics
evidentiary rules, and do not guarantee the right of 
the accused to be represented by a defense counsel at 
the hearing. The maximum punishments are limited to 
“one month of confinement and other relatively modest punishments.”62 A service member must consent to 
have a case heard at a summary court martial. Generally, an O5-level commander (lieutenant colonel or 
equivalent rank) can convene summary courts-martial. 
Special courts-martial are at the intermediate level, 
typically used for minor offenses that are generally 
equivalent to misdemeanors in civilian courts. Special 
courts-martial can try both officer and enlisted personnel. They include a military judge, defense counsel and 
military prosecutor, and court martial panel members. 
The maximum punishments include a bad conduct discharge and 1 year in confinement. Typically, designated 
commanders at the O6 level (colonel or equivalent rank) 
are authorized to convene special courts-martial and 
lower level summary courts-martial. 
General courts-martial are the military’s felonylevel courts. Like special courts-martial, general courtsmartial include a military judge, defense counsel, 
military prosecutor, and court martial panel members. 
There is no sentence limitation at this level and appeal 
is automatic. General court-martial convening authority is normally reserved to designated general and flag 
officers, who are also authorized to convene special 
and summary courts-martial. 
Article 32 Investigations
Unless waived by the service member, a preliminary 
hearing must be held in accordance with Article 32 
of the UCMJ before a case can be referred to a general court-martial. 63,64 This probable cause hearing, 
referred to as an Article 32 investigation, provides 
service members with substantially more rights 
than the civilian grand jury equivalent. An Article 32 
investigating officer, often a military lawyer, must 
impartially hear the evidence and make the following specific determinations: whether there is probable 
cause to conclude that an offense or offenses have been 
committed, whether the accused committed it, and 
whether a court-martial would have jurisdiction over 
the offense and the accused. The investigating officer 
is also charged with considering the technical form of 
the charge and recommending how the charge should 
be handled (Exhibit 5-8).
Referral to Court-Martial
Court-martial convening authorities determine 
whether charges should be referred to a court-martial, 
and if so, at which level. Unless authority is withheld 
by a senior UCMJ convening authority or by law or service regulation, charges can be referred to courts within 
a convening authority’s level of authority. Otherwise, 
charges must be forwarded with recommendations to 
the next higher convening authority for similar determinations. Consultation with victims is also generally 
required prior to referral. Any decision to refer charges 
to a special or general court-martial must be informed 
by advice from the servicing staff judge advocate, a 
senior military attorney assigned to advise convening 
authorities on military justice matters. 
EXHIBIT 5-8
ARTICLE 32 INVESTIGATIONS 
In 2007, First Lieutenant Elizabeth Whiteside, an Army nurse, was charged with kidnapping, aggravated assault, 
assault upon a superior commissioned officer, reckless endangerment, willful discharge of a firearm, communicating a threat, and self-injury in a hostile-fire zone. The charges stemmed from an incident that occurred January 1, 
2007, at Camp Cropper, Iraq. 1 According to press reports, Whiteside suffered a breakdown and as a result held a 
senior nurse against her will at gunpoint, threatened other soldiers, fired her weapon into the air, and ultimately 
shot herself. 2 Later, while undergoing treatment at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center, charges were preferred 
against her and an Article 32 investigation was conducted. A sanity board concluded that Whiteside lacked mental 
responsibility for her actions. 3 After reviewing the Article 32 report of investigation and recommendations from the 
investigating officer and the chain of command at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center, the general court-martial 
convening authority dismissed all charges without a trial. 1
(1) Boyce P. Court-martial convening authority dismisses all charges against lieutenant. US Army website. https://www.army.mil/
article/7209/Court_martial_convening_authority_dismisses_all_charges_against_lieutenant/. Published January 30, 2008. Accessed 
November 20, 2017. (2) Priest D, Hull A. A patient prosecuted. Washington Post. December 2, 2007:A1. (3) Priest D, Hull A. Leniency 
suggested for officer who shot herself. Washington Post. December 11, 2007. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
article/2007/12/10/AR2007121001613.html. Accessed May 11, 2018.
80
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Referred Cases 
Once referred to trial at the special or general courtmartial levels, the military judge takes effective control 
of the case. A substantial pretrial phase precedes any 
trial. Service members have many rights, including the 
right to counsel, to demand a speedy trial, to obtain 
witnesses and other evidence, to request and consult 
with experts, to litigate constitutional and procedural 
violations, and to raise motions to suppress evidence 
and dismiss charges; they also have discovery rights 
for evidence. At trial, service members also have substantial rights, including the right to challenge the 
judge and panel members for lack of impartiality, to 
challenge jurisdiction, to request trial by a military 
judge alone or trial by court members, to confront 
witnesses and challenge evidence, to call witnesses 
and present evidence, to raise defenses, to challenge 
the sufficiency of the evidence, and to remain silent.
Convening authorities continue to play important 
roles while charges are referred. For example, the 
convening authority must decide whether to accept a 
service member’s request for discharge in lieu of courtmartial, if offered. Similarly, the convening authority 
must decide whether to accept any offer for a pretrial 
agreement, which often involves a sentence limitation 
in exchange for a guilty plea or trial by military judge 
alone. Additionally, the convening authority must 
ensure that court members are properly selected and 
made available. 
Roles of Military Medical Officers in Courts-Martial
MMOs may be appointed to serve as court-martial 
panel members. 65 In this capacity, the officer essentially 
serves as a juror. Such duty takes precedence over other 
duties and any planned leave. MMOs are also commonly called as witnesses at courts-martial. In some cases, 
they are called to discuss direct observations about a 
medical condition or injury that may be relevant to guilt, 
innocence, or punishment. In other cases, as in state 
and federal courts, they may be asked to testify about 
statements that a patient made in the course of medical 
treatment in accordance with Military Rule of Evidence 
803. 3 When mental responsibility or mental capacity are 
an issue at trial, qualified experts are called to testify. 
Post-Trial
Shortly after trial, if requested by the service member, the convening authority must decide whether to 
defer any period of confinement. The convening authority’s action must be in writing and must state the 
reasons why any such request was denied. Similarly, 
the convening authority must respond in writing to a 
request by a service member to defer forfeitures of pay 
and state the basis for the decision. Additionally, the 
convening authority must also respond to any request 
to waive forfeitures of pay for a period not to exceed 6 
months for the support of family member dependents. 
Once the record of trial has been prepared, it is 
forwarded to the staff judge advocate for review and 
advice to the convening authority regarding the proceedings. The staff judge advocate’s formal advice is 
served on the convicted service member and defense 
counsel, who have an opportunity to review it for 
errors and to submit information for the convening 
authority’s consideration. Crime victims also have the 
right to submit matters for the convening authority to 
consider in taking initial action on the findings and 
EXHIBIT 5-9
APPELLATE REVIEW 
In 1985, Commander Donal Billig, formerly a heart surgeon at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center, was charged 
with negligent homicide, involuntary manslaughter, and dereliction of duty in connection with the deaths of several 
patients and several other surgeries performed in 1983. Billig joined the Navy in 1982 while in his mid-50s, shortly 
after being dismissed by a private medical group in Pittsburgh. He had also been forced to leave a medical practice 
in New Jersey in 1980 after losing his operating privileges. Billig reportedly had not performed heart surgery for 
several years before joining the Navy, and suffered from poor vision. Dr Billig was found guilty of two counts of 
Article 119 (involuntary manslaughter), one count of Article 134 (negligent homicide), and 18 counts of Article 92 
(dereliction of duty). He was sentenced to 4 years’ imprisonment and a dismissal from service. In 1988, the NavyMarine Corps Court of Military Review was not satisfied of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and threw out his 
convictions, released him from the confinement facility at Fort Leavenworth, and reinstated him in service with 
back pay. 1
(1) United States v Billig, 26 MJ 744 (NMCCMR 1988).
81
Military Law and Ethics
recommendations of the court-martial. The staff judge 
advocate must file an addendum to the initial advice 
addressing any legal error alleged.
Traditionally, convening authorities had broad 
discretion to disapprove findings of guilt and to approve, disapprove, commute, or suspend the sentence 
adjudged at trial. However, in 2013, Congress limited 
that authority. Pursuant to these changes, a convening 
authority may not dismiss a finding or approve a lesser 
included offense unless the offense carries a maximum 
punishment of 2 years’ confinement and the sentence 
adjudged does not include a punitive discharge or 
confinement greater than 6 months. No changes are 
authorized to findings of guilt in cases involving rape 
and sexual assault. 
The convening authority’s initial action executes 
all portions of the sentence except for a dishonorable 
discharge, bad conduct discharge, dismissal, or death 
sentence. Appellate review is required in all such cases. 
Each service has a court of criminal appeals (Exhibit 
5-9), and subsequent appeals go to the Court of Appeals 
for the Armed Forces. After that, a service member can 
petition the Supreme Court to hear the case on a petition 
for a writ of certiorari, which is rarely granted.
EXHIBIT 5-10
US PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE DISCIPLINE 
In 2006, Dr Pearson “Trey” Sunderland, a Public Health Service Commissioned Corps officer and researcher at 
the National Institutes for Mental Health (NIMH), plead guilty to criminal conflict of interest in connection with 
his research activities. Sunderland had accepted nearly $300,000 as a consultant for a pharmaceutical company 
affected by his ongoing research activities at NIMH, and provided the company with thousands of samples from 
his research. He failed to seek approval or disclose the relationship and payments in ethics reports to the agency. 
Sunderland was sentenced to 2 years of probation, fined $300,000, and ordered to perform 400 hours of community 
service. 1 Sunderland’s Public Health Service disciplinary hearing was reportedly delayed at the request of the Department of Justice while the criminal case was underway. 2
(1) Rich E. NIH scientist pleads guilty in accepting $285,000 from Pfizer. Washington Post. December 9, 2006. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/12/10/AR2007121001613.html. Accessed May 11, 2018. (2) Weiss R. NIH punishments criticized. 
Washington Post. September 14, 2006. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/09/13/AR2006091302024.html. 
Accessed May 11, 2018.
DISCIPLINARY RULES UNIQUE TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE OFFICERS
Uniformed PHS officers are subject to administrative discipline, reduction in grade, and separation from 
service (termination of commission) for misconduct 
under regulations issued by the Department of Health 
and Human Services. These regulations cover both active and retired officers. The PHS retains the right to 
impose administrative discipline even when its officers 
are subject to the UCMJ (Exhibit 5-10).
Under PHS personnel instructions,66 misconduct 
includes violation of the department’s standards of 
conduct regulations, and any other federal regulation, law, or official government policy, including the 
following:
 
1. disobedience of the lawful orders of an official superior;
 
2. negligence or carelessness in obeying orders 
or in performing official duties;
 
3. unauthorized use or consumption of controlled substances or alcohol while on duty, 
being under the influence of such substances 
or alcohol while on duty, or illegally possessing, transferring, or ingesting controlled 
substances at any time; 
 
4. engaging in action or behavior of a dishonorable nature which reflects discredit upon the 
officer or PHS or both;
 
5. failure to honorably discharge just debts in a 
timely manner;
 
6. acts of insubordination or use of insulting 
or defamatory language or gestures disrespectful of, or displaying a contemptuous 
attitude toward, official superiors or other 
officers;
 
7. making any public statement that falsely 
impugns the professional competency or 
personal character of a superior or another 
officer;
 
8. waste of public funds or property, or knowingly permitting such waste;
82
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 
9. conviction of a felony;
 10. submission of false information in an application for appointment or in any other official 
document;
 11. abusive treatment of subordinate officers, 
employees, patients, or program beneficiaries, or of members of the public in their 
dealings with the government; or
 12. absence from his or her assigned place of 
duty without authorized leave. 66
Like their military counterparts, PHS officers have 
administrative due process rights when misconduct 
is alleged, and adverse proceedings may result in 
disciplinary actions. 66,67 Ultimately, when a board of 
inquiry finds that misconduct occurred and that the officer’s commission should be terminated as a result, as 
with military separations, the board must recommend 
an appropriate characterization of the discharge as 
“honorable,” “under honorable conditions,” or “under 
other than honorable conditions.” 
THE FEDERAL TORT CLAIMS ACT AND THE FERES DOCTRINE
The overriding need for good order and discipline 
in the military has also contributed to an important 
difference between civil law rights and liabilities of 
service members versus civilians, which is of particular 
significance for the military and uniformed services 
medical community: active duty service members 
cannot sue the federal government, other service members, or civilian government employees for injuries that 
arise incident to service. 68 This means that active duty 
uniformed service members cannot sue uniformed 
service doctors for medical malpractice. 
The Federal Tort Claims Act and the Military 
Claims Act
The United States enjoys sovereign immunity from 
lawsuits unless it consents to liability. 69 Historically, 
claims for redress and waivers of sovereign immunity 
were handled through private bills in Congress, an 
unpredictable process with uneven results. 68 In 1946, 
through the FTCA,70 Congress provided a limited 
waiver of immunity for damages for personal injury, 
death, or property damage caused by the negligence of 
federal employees acting within the scope of employment. In FTCA cases, the United States is substituted 
as a party for the federal employee. Claims must be 
brought administratively before the agency involved 
and must follow detailed procedures prior to any 
lawsuit. Congress shifted adjudication of FTCA claims 
to the courts. 
Notably, however, the law only applies in the United States. It also excludes “[a]ny claim arising out of 
the combatant activities of the military or naval forces, 
or the Coast Guard, during time of war.”71
For overseas claims, the Military Claims Act 
(MCA)72 provides a limited waiver of immunity for 
those who are not active duty service members. The 
MCA relies entirely on administrative processes and 
does not allow lawsuits. As with the FTCA, combatrelated claims are excluded from MCA coverage. 
The Feres Doctrine
In 1950 the Supreme Court considered the FTCA’s 
application in Feres v United States68 and two related 
cases in which the military was sued for alleged 
negligence that harmed a service member incident to 
service. Feres involved claims that negligence led to 
the death of a service member in a barracks fire. The 
two companion cases, Jefferson v United States73 and 
Griggs v United States,74 involved medical malpractice 
claims. In Jefferson, a former service member who had 
abdominal surgery while in the Army brought a suit 
for negligence when, in a subsequent operation after 
being discharged from service, a large towel marked 
“Medical Department US Army” was removed from 
his stomach. Griggs involved a suit brought by the 
widow of a service member who died after surgery, 
allegedly due to negligence by military surgeons. The 
Supreme Court ultimately held that all three cases were 
barred from going forward, finding that the FTCA does 
not waive sovereign immunity in such cases. Thus, the 
Feres doctrine was developed as a judicial exception 
to the FTCA. 
The Supreme Court has relied on several rationales 
in support of the Feres doctrine: the court feared adverse impacts on good order and discipline and unit 
effectiveness if service members could sue the military 
or fellow service members for injuries incurred incident to service, involving the judicial branch in military 
affairs. 75 Additionally, the court noted that the military 
provides “simple, certain and uniform compensation 
for injuries or death of those in armed services,” which 
normally requires no litigation, applies regardless of 
negligence, and compares “extremely favorably” with 
civilian workers’ compensation. 68,75 Finally, the court 
has observed that federal law properly governs the 
relationship of military personnel with the government 
and determined it would be unfair and inequitable to 
apply disparate state tort laws to acts or omissions 
committed in a state pursuant to military service. 68 
83
Military Law and Ethics
The Feres doctrine has also been applied to bar 
claims by active duty uniformed PHS officers,76–78 and 
it extends to the derivative claims of family members, 
as in the case of the death of a service member due 
to alleged medical malpractice. Nonetheless, family 
members and others may still file claims for medical 
malpractice that they allegedly suffer at the hands of 
uniformed personnel. 
The Feres doctrine has been controversial since its 
inception, but has withstood numerous attempts to 
eliminate or modify its application. 79–82 Congress 
has thus far declined to legislatively eliminate the 
Feres doctrine or to limit its application in medical malpractice cases. The Supreme Court has also 
refused to overrule Feres or declare that it does not 
apply in medical malpractice cases. 83 However, the 
court may reconsider the Feres doctrine in the future in the context of pre-birth cases, because some 
federal circuit courts of appeals disagree about its 
application in such cases. 84 Highly publicized cases 
continue to go before the court for review. In 2011, 
the Supreme Court denied a writ of certiorari in a 
well-publicized case in which the widow of an Air 
Force staff sergeant was barred from pursuing a 
medical malpractice claim against the Travis Air 
Force Base Medical Center after her husband was left 
in a vegetative state and later died after an appendectomy. 83 In 2017, after a monetary settlement was 
reached, the Supreme Court dismissed a petition for 
writ of certiorari in a case in which an Army captain 
having a scheduled caesarean section was given a 
drug that she was allergic to, causing her unborn 
child to be deprived of oxygen, which resulted in 
cerebral palsy. 85,86 
The Feres doctrine creates challenges for MMOs. In 
a litigious society, accountability for wrongs is often 
associated with a court verdict or negotiated settlement and monetary damages. The lack of an available 
civil law remedy for active duty service members may 
lead some to conclude that military medical personnel are not held accountable for errors and omissions 
that cause harm to their fellow service members. This 
misperception may be exacerbated by the fact that the 
military’s quality assurance program has statutory 
protections against disclosure of quality assurance investigations87 and the fact that Privacy Act protections 
shield personnel matters from public view. This lack 
of transparency could ultimately lead to additional 
calls for a legislative “repeal” or judicial modification of the Feres doctrine. Others might increasingly 
turn to the UCMJ to investigate and adjudicate alleged medical negligence by medical personnel as a 
dereliction of duty. Military medicine leaders must 
ensure that medical quality assurance programs88 are 
faithfully executed and that medical personnel are 
held accountable. 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE JOINT ETHICS REGULATION
Like all federal employees, military personnel must 
adhere to standards of conduct designed to ensure 
the integrity of government operations. Moreover, 
it is DoD policy that “[i]ndividual conduct, official 
programs and daily activities within DoD shall be accomplished lawfully and ethically . . . .”28(sec84. 3f) From 
an organizational perspective, ethical failures can significantly derail important programs and acquisitions, 
and may result in substantial delays and unanticipated 
expenditures. Investigations and negative publicity 
may erode public and congressional confidence in 
agency operations. As noted earlier in this chapter, on 
an individual level, violations of many JER provisions 
may be punished under the UCMJ and the federal 
criminal code. Additional penalties include civil law 
and administrative actions. Military and uniformed 
medical officers must familiarize themselves with ethical requirements and principles, ensure compliance 
with ethics programs, and cultivate an organizational 
culture of ethical conduct.
For DoD personnel, comprehensive government 
ethics guidance is found in the JER. To help DoD 
personnel better understand and apply ethics rules 
to particular situations, the JER provides for attorneys appointed as ethics counselors28(sec84. 4b2),89 under 
programs administered by designated service-level 
agency ethics officials. In fact, it is DoD policy that 
when any question exists about the propriety of an 
activity or action, DoD personnel are to consult with 
an ethics counselor. 28(para1-212),89 Since ethics counselors 
represent the agency rather than individual employees, 
communications are not protected by the attorneyclient privilege. Nonetheless, to incentivize preventive 
consultations with an ethics counselor, the JER rules 
out disciplinary action against those who rely on an 
ethics counselor in good faith, after full disclosure of 
pertinent facts, unless criminal conduct is involved. 
MMOs should therefore become familiar with the ethics counselor at their servicing legal office. 
Fourteen general principles form the basis for the 
federal standards of conduct and the JER. 90 By becoming familiar with these principles, MMOs will be able 
to identify potential ethics issues for further resolution. 
(1) Public service is a public trust, requiring employees to place loyalty to the Constitution, the laws and 
84
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
ethical principles above private gain. 
(2) Employees shall not hold financial interests that 
conflict with the conscientious performance of duty. 
(3) Employees shall not engage in financial transactions using nonpublic Government information or allow the improper use of such information to further 
any private interest. 
(4) An employee shall not, except as permitted by 
subpart B of this part, solicit or accept any gift or 
other item of monetary value from any person or entity seeking official action from, doing business with, 
or conducting activities regulated by the employee’s 
agency, or whose interests may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the 
employee’s duties. 
(5) Employees shall put forth honest effort in the performance of their duties.
(6) Employees shall not knowingly make unauthorized commitments or promises of any kind purporting to bind the Government. 
(7) Employees shall not use public office for private 
gain. 
(8) Employees shall act impartially and not give preferential treatment to any private organization or individual. 
(9) Employees shall protect and conserve Federal 
property and shall not use it for other than authorized activities. 
(10) Employees shall not engage in outside employment or activities, including seeking or negotiating 
for employment, that conflict with official Government duties and responsibilities. 
(11) Employees shall disclose waste, fraud, abuse, 
and corruption to appropriate authorities. 
(12) Employees shall satisfy in good faith their obligations as citizens, including all just financial obligations, especially those—such as federal, state, or local 
taxes—that are imposed by law. 
(13) Employees shall adhere to all laws and regulations that provide equal opportunity for all Americans regardless of race, color, religion, sex, national 
origin, age, or handicap.
(14) Employees shall endeavor to avoid any actions 
creating the appearance that they are violating the 
law or the ethical standards set forth in this part. 
Whether particular circumstances create an appearance that the law or these standards have been violated shall be determined from the perspective of a 
reasonable person with knowledge of the relevant 
facts. 90
A full discussion of the JER and government ethics 
laws is beyond the scope of this chapter. Nonetheless, 
certain questions that commonly arise in the context 
of military medicine deserve mention, including relations with non-federal entities; teaching, writing, and 
speaking; gifts; and outside employment. 
Relations with non-federal entities. DoD personnel must not state or imply endorsement of a 
non-federal entity or its services, products, events, 
or enterprises. 28(para3-209) However, special rules apply to the Combined Federal Campaign and specific 
military relief organizations. Additionally, consultation is needed with the servicing ethics counselor 
before participating in an official capacity with any 
non-federal entity, including as a speaker, panelist, 
or award recipient at non-federal entity events and 
conferences, or as a command representative or liaison 
to a non-federal entity’s management group. Certain 
groups have statutory authority for particular support, 
including the American Registry of Pathology, the 
Henry M. Jackson Foundation for Military Medicine, 
and the American Red Cross. 28(para3-212),91 
Teaching, writing, and speaking. The JER, as well 
as the Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct for 
Employees of the Department of Defense28(para3-305a),92 
require DoD personnel to use prominent disclaimers when teaching, writing, or speaking on subjects 
related to agency matters. Public affairs and security 
reviews are also required for lectures, speeches, and 
writings that pertain to military matters, national 
security issues, or subjects of significant concern to 
DoD. 28(para305b),93 Any offer of an honorarium in conjunction with teaching, writing, or speaking must be 
coordinated in advance with an ethics counselor to 
ascertain whether acceptance is possible. 28(para3-305c) 
Gifts. The JER and DoD’s Supplemental Standards 
of Ethical Conduct limit gifts from outside sources and 
between DoD employees. Generally, DoD personnel 
may not accept gifts given due to their official position, 
or given by an entity that does or seeks to do business 
with the agency. Certain exceptions permit limited 
gifts such as speaker mementos with little intrinsic 
value and modest items of food and refreshments. Gifts 
from subordinates are also normally prohibited, with 
limited exceptions allowing such gifts for significant 
life occasions such as weddings, retirement, and departure from the supervisory position. Nonetheless, 
the JER and DoD’s Supplemental Standards of Ethical 
Conduct limit the value of gifts that a group of subordinates can make to senior officials. 
Any offer of travel, lodging, meals, or expenses 
in an official capacity in relation to participation in 
a non-federal entity conference or event compels 
advance consultation with the ethics counselor and 
requires proper approval by agency heads before acceptance. 94,95 After-the-fact approval is not permitted 
for gifts of travel. Failure to comply subjects the traveler to possible fines and disciplinary action. 
Outside employment. DoD’s Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct requires prior approval for 
outside employment and business activities for financial disclosure filers. 92 Furthermore, most commands 
85
Military Law and Ethics
require prior approval for any outside employment. 
In addition, federal law prohibitions against dual 
compensation and conflicts of interests bar active duty 
military personnel and government civilian employees 
who moonlight as healthcare practitioners from billing Tricare for fees generated from treating Tricare 
beneficiaries. 96,97
Many MMOs, and those under their supervision, 
are required to file financial disclosure forms. The financial disclosure program is an important part of an 
agency ethics program because it enables supervisors 
to identify potential conflicts of interests before problems arise. This allows the supervisory chain of command and ethics counselors to fashion any necessary 
preventive steps to avoid conflicts so that no violations 
occur. Supervisors must carefully review financial 
disclosures because they are in the best position to 
understand each filer’s duties and responsibilities in 
order to flag potential conflicts of interests. 
The DoD Standards of Conduct Office regularly updates the Encyclopedia of Ethical Failure,98 a compendium 
of ethical lapses and failures committed by military 
and federal officials. While all of the ethical failure 
summaries provide useful lessons in government ethic 
laws for MMOs, some cases directly involve military 
medical personnel or military medicine. In one case, 
the director of a Navy health clinic repeatedly asked 
a subordinate for loans, and ultimately only repaid 
part of a $3,000 loan. A second case involves a civilian 
physician working at an Army health clinic who improperly obtained medical care, tests, and medication 
from the clinic. Another case involves a former Army 
officer who was responsible for procurement of a psychiatric services contract for an Air Force hospital while 
on active duty, and later, in retirement, improperly 
represented the same contractor to the government. 
The Encyclopedia serves as a useful training aid for 
all government personnel. Ethics counselors at local 
servicing legal offices can provide more information 
about government ethics and standards of conduct. 
SUMMARY
MMOs in all of the uniformed services must understand the fundamental legal differences that apply to 
them as medical professionals serving in or with the 
military and become familiar with their critical roles in 
the military justice system. An enhanced understanding of key principles of military criminal and administrative law enables MMOs to better appreciate critical 
military legal systems and programs that maintain 
good order and discipline, advance military justice, 
and preserve standards of professionalism and the 
integrity of government programs. Greater knowledge 
also facilitates a fuller awareness of the essential roles 
that MMOs have as leaders in these systems. Finally, 
a better grasp of military law also provides greater 
insights into the varied roles that military lawyers play 
in each system and the enabling advice and services 
they can provide to MMOs. 
The military justice system represents the most 
significant difference between military law and civilian law to develop since the days of the American 
Revolution. Service members are subject to a separate military justice system in addition to federal, 
state, and local criminal codes in recognition of 
the military’s unique mission, and the necessity to 
maintain good order and discipline throughout the 
armed forces. As the foundation of the military justice 
system, the UCMJ serves as both an instrument of 
justice and as a commander’s disciplinary tool for 
maintaining good order and discipline. By better 
understanding the UCMJ and the military justice 
system as a whole, MMOs will be more effective in 
their roles when disciplinary infractions and criminal 
offenses are alleged.
Administrative law principles and programs also 
impact the standards of professionalism and fitness 
for duty for medical personnel serving in the armed 
forces. An important legal difference in the context of 
military medicine is the FTCA bar on medical malpractice claims by active duty personnel. Notwithstanding 
this ban, as stewards of military medical quality assurance programs, MMOs have crucial roles in providing 
professional oversight and regulation for the military 
medical profession. 
The JER and DoD’s Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct represent an additional area of departure 
from civilian norms. As leaders under military ethics 
programs, MMOs have important responsibilities to 
administer ethics programs and maintain the integrity 
of government operations. 
As the foregoing discussion makes clear, the 
full extent of military law cannot be described in a 
single chapter. MMOs must engage in lifelong selfdevelopment, and should include military law topics 
in individual development plans for themselves and 
their subordinates. Local legal offices can assist with 
classes, training aids, materials, and presentations. 
86
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
REFERENCES
 
1. Parker v Levy, 417 US 733 (1974).
 
2. Goldman v Weinberger, 475 US 503 (1986).
 
3. US Department of Defense. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016. http://jsc.
defense.gov/Portals/99/Documents/MCM2016.pdf?ver=2016-12-08-181411-957. Accessed November 20, 2017.
 
4. In re Grimley, 137 US 147 (1890).
 
5. Winthrop W. Military Law and Precedents. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office; 1920. http://www.
loc.gov/rr/frd/Military_Law/ML_precedents.html. Accessed October 18, 2017.
 
6. Morgan EM. The background of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. Vanderbilt Law Rev. 1953;6:179. https://www.
jagcnet.army.mil/DOCLIBS/MILITARYLAWREVIEW.NSF/20a66345129fe3d885256e5b00571830/84d42b7fc814219785
256e5b00583750/$FILE/MLR%2027-100-28%2019650401.pdf. Accessed October 18, 2017.
 
7. Larkin FE. Professor Edmund M. Morgan and the drafting of the Uniform Code. Mil Law Rev. 1965;28: 7-8.
 
8. Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 USC § 801–946 (1950).
 
9. Truman HS. Prescribing the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. Exec Order no. 10214, February 8, 1951.
 10. UCMJ, Article 146. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 11. Solorio v United States, 483 US 435 (1987). 
 12. United States v Phillips, 58 MJ 217 (CAAF 2003). 
 13. United States v Stevenson, 53 MJ 257 (CAAF 2000), cert denied 555 US 816 (2008). 
 14. United States v Bowie, 34 CMR 411 (CMA 1964). 
 15. United States v Reynolds, No. 201600415 (NMCMR 2017). http://www.jag.navy.mil/courts/documents/archive/2017/
REYNOLDS-201600415-UNPUB.pdf. Accessed October 18, 2017. 
 16. UCMJ, Article 2(8). Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 17. Public Health Service Act, 42 USC, Chapter 6a, § 215(a) (1944).
 18. US Department of Health and Human Services. Non-Departmental Organization Details. Washington, DC: DHHS; 2007. 
Commissioned Corps Directive CCD 121. 04. https://dcp.psc.gov/ccmis/ccis/documents/CCD121_04.pdf. Accessed 
November 20, 2017.
 19. US Department of Defense. Criminal Jurisdiction Over Civilians Employed by or Accompanying the Armed Forces Outside 
of the United States, Certain Service Members, and Former Service Members. Washington, DC: DoD; 2005. DoD Instruction 
5525. 11. 
 20. The Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act of 2000. Pub L no. 106-523, 18 USC § 3261.
 21. US Constitution, Amendment V.
 22. UCMJ, Article 44. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 23. United States v Lanza, 260 US 377 (1922).
87
Military Law and Ethics
 24. United States v Stokes, 12 MJ 229 (CMA 1982).
 25. US Department of the Army. Legal Services: Military Justice. Washington, DC: DA; 2016. Army Regulation 27-10.
 26. Soble J. At Okinawa protest, thousands call for removal of US bases. New York Times. June 19, 2016. https://www.
nytimes.com/2016/06/20/world/asia/japan-okinawa-protest-united-states-military.html. Accessed November 20, 2017. 
 27. UCMJ, Article 137. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 28. US Department of Defense. Joint Ethics Regulation. Washington, DC: DoD; 1993. DoD Regulation 5500. 7–R. http://www.
esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/dodm/550007r.pdf. Accessed October 17, 2017.
 29. US Department of Defense. Handling Dissident and Protest Activities Among Members of the Armed Forces. Washington, 
DC: DoD; 2009. DoD Instruction 1325. 06. 
 30. US Department of the Army. Personnel–General, Army Command Policy. Washington, DC: 2014. Army Regulation 60020.
 31. US Department of the Army. Military Judge’s Benchbook. Washington, DC: DA; 2010: 682. Army Pamphlet 27-9.
 32. Solis G. The Law of Armed Conflict, International Humanitarian Law in War. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 
2010: 149.
 33. US Department of Defense. Department of Defense Law of War Manual. Washington, DC: DoD; June 2015 (updated December 2016): 1101. https://www.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/DoD%20Law%20of%20War%20Manual%20
-%20June%202015%20Updated%20Dec%202016.pdf?ver=2016-12-13-172036-190. Accessed November 20, 2017.
 34. War Crimes Act, 18 USC § 2441 (2006).
 35. The Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act of 2000, 18 USC § 3261-7.
 36. International Criminal Court. Understanding the International Criminal Court. The Hague, Netherlands: ICC; 2013: 4, 
para 9. https://www.icc-cpi.int/iccdocs/PIDS/publications/UICCEng.pdf. Accessed September 2, 2017.
 37. International Criminal Court. Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The Hague, Netherlands: ICC; 2011: art 
17. https://www.icc-cpi.int/resource-library/Documents/RS-Eng.pdf. Accessed September 2, 2017.
 38. UCMJ, Article 37. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016. 
 39. UCMJ, Articles 22–24. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016. 
 40. US Department of Defense. Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) Program Procedures. Washington, DC: DoD; 
2013. DoD Instruction 6495. 02.
 41. Victims of sexual assault: access to legal assistance and services of Sexual Assault Response Coordinators and Sexual 
Assault Victim Advocates, 10 USC § 1565b(b) (2011).
 42. US Constitution, Amendment VI.
 43. UCMJ, Article 10. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 44. US Department of the Army. Procedures for Administrative Investigations and Boards of Officers. Washington, DC: DA; 
2016. Army Regulation 15-6.
 45. US Department of the Navy. Manual of the Judge Advocate General (JAGMAN). Washington, DC: DN, Office of the Judge 
Advocate General; 2012: Chap 1. JAGINST 5800. 7F.
88
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 46. Secretary of the Air Force, Office of the Inspector General, Complaints Resolution Directorate. Commander Directed 
Investigation (CDI) Guide. Washington, DC: SAF/IGQ; 2016. http://www.af.mil/Portals/1/documents/ig/CDI_Guide_18February-2016.pdf. Access May 11, 2018.
 47. US Coast Guard. Administrative Investigations Manual. Washington, DC: USCG; 2007. Commandant Instruction 
M5830. 1A.
 48. UCMJ, Article 50a. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 49. UCMJ, Rule for Courts-Martial 909. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016. 
 50. UCMJ, Article 706. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 51. Tan M. Chaplain under fire for comments during training. Army Times. December 10, 2014. http://www.armytimes.
com/news/your-army/2014/12/10/chaplain-under-fire-for-comments-during-training/. Accessed December 14, 2017.
 52. US Department of the Air Force. Unfavorable Information File Program. Washington, DC: USAF; 2014. Air Force Instruction 36-2907.
 53. US Department of the Army. Unfavorable Information. Washington, DC: DA: 1986. Army Regulation 600-37.
 54. US Department of the Army. Military Police Motor Vehicle Traffic Supervision. Washington, DC: DA: 2006. Army Regulation 190-5. 
 55. US Department of the Army. Officer Transfers and Discharges. Washington, DC: DA: 2006. Army Regulation 600-8-24.
 56. US Department of the Army. Active Duty Enlisted Separations. Washington, DC: DA: 2016. Army Regulation 635-200.
 57. US Department of the Navy. Officer Performance. Washington, DC: DN; 2013. MILPERSMAN 1611-010, NAVPERSCOM 
June 14, 2013. 
 58. Gorski K. Comment: nonjudicial punishment in the military: why a lower burden of proof across all branches is unnecessary. Natl Secur Law J. 1983;2:83.
 59. US Coast Guard. Military Justice Manual. Washington, DC: USCG; 2000. Commandant Instruction M5810. 1.
 60. US Department of the Air Force. Nonjudicial Punishment. Washington, DC: USAF; 2015. Air Force Instruction 51-202.
 61. 28th Bomb Wing Legal Office. Airmen receive Article 15s for their actions. Rapid City Journal. June 5, 2012. http://
rapidcityjournal.com/news/local/communities/ellsworth/airmen-receive-article-s-for-their-actions/article_81ee70ecaf5e-11e1-8a84-0019bb2963f4.html. Accessed May 10, 2018.
 62. Weiss v United States, 510 US 163 (1994).
 63. UCMJ, Article 32. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 64. UCMJ, Rule for Courts-Martial 405. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States. 2016 ed. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
 65. United States v Bartlett, 66 MJ 426 (CAAF July 7, 2008). 
 66. US Department of Health and Human Services. Commissioned Corps Personnel Manual. Washington, DC: DHHS; 1983:Pt 
4, Chap CC46.
 67. Agwunobi JO. Continuing ethics and management concerns at the National Institutes of Health and the Public Health 
Service Commissioned Corps. Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the House Committee 
on Energy and Commerce. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services; September 13, 2006. https://
www.cancer.gov/about-nci/legislative/hearings/2006-john-agwunobi-testimony.pdf. Accessed May 10, 2018. 
89
Military Law and Ethics
 68. Feres v United States, 340 US 135 (1950).
 69. Price v United States, 174 US 373, 375 (1899).
 70. 28 USC § 1346(b).
 71. 28 USC § 2680(j).
 72. 10 USC § 2733.
 73. Jefferson v United States, 178 F2d 518 (4th Cir 1949), aff’d Feres v United States, 340 US 135 (1950). 
 74. Griggs v United States, 178 F2d 1 (10th Cir 1949), rev’d sub nom Feres v United States, 340 US 135 (1950). 
 75. United States v Johnson, 481 US 681, 688 (1987). 
 76. Diaz-Romero v Mukasey, 513 F3d 115 (1st Cir 2008).
 77. Bowers v United States, 904 F2d 450, 452 (8th Cir 1990).
 78. Scheppan v United States, 810 F2d 461, 463 (4th Cir 1987).
 79. Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law of the House Committee on the Judiciary, Carmelo 
Rodriquez Military Medical Accountability Act of 2009, 111th Cong, 1st Sess (2009). 
 80. Hearing Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, The Feres Doctrine: An Examination of The Military Exception to the 
Federal Tort Claims Act, 107th Cong, 2d Sess (2002). 
 81. Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Administrative Law and Governmental Relations of the House Committee on the Judiciary, 
Claims for Negligent Medical Care Provided Members of the Armed Forces, 102nd Cong, 1st Sess. (1991). 
 82. Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Courts and Administrative Practice of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Medical 
Malpractice Suits for Armed Services Personnel, 100th Cong, 2d Sess (1988). 
 83. Witt v United States, 131 SCt 3058 (June 27, 2011).
 84. Wilke T. Military mothers and claims under the Federal Tort Claims Act for injuries that occur pre-birth. Notre Dame 
Law Rev Online. 2016;91. http://scholarship.law.nd.edu/ndlr_online/vol91/iss3/1. Accessed November 20, 2017.
 85. Ortiz v United States, 786 F3d 817 (10th Cir 2015), cert dismissed (2017)(No. 15-488)(case dismissed upon petition by both 
parties under Rule 46).
 86. Kime P. Justice Department offers settlement on Feres case, halting Supreme Court consideration. Military Times. June 
16, 2016. http://www.militarytimes.com/pay-benefits/military-benefits/health-care/2016/06/16/justice-departmentoffers-settlement-on-feres-case-halting-supreme-court-consideration/. Accessed November 20, 2017.
 87. 10 USC § 1102, Confidentiality of medical quality assurance records: qualified immunity for participants. 1986. 
 88. US Department of Defense. Medical Quality Assurance (MQA) and Clinical Quality Management in the Military Health 
System (MHS). Washington, DC: DoD; 2011. DoD Instruction 6025. 13. 
 89. 5 CFR, Part 2635. 107(b), Standards of ethical conduct for employees of the executive branch. 
 90. 5 CFR Part 2635. 101, Basic obligation of public service. 
 91. US Department of Defense. Procedures and Support for NFEs Authorized to Operation on DoD Installations. Washington, 
DC: DoD; 2008. DoD Instruction 1000. 15.
90
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
 92. 5 CFR, Part 3601, Supplemental standards of ethical conduct for employees of the Department of Defense. 
 93. US Department of Defense. Security and Policy Review of DoD Information for Public Release. Washington, DC: DoD; 2014. 
DoD Instruction 5230. 29.
 94. 31 USC § 1353, Acceptance of travel and related expenses from non-federal sources.
 95. 41 CFR, Part 304, Payment of travel expenses from a non-federal source.
 96. 5 USC § 5536, Extra pay for extra services prohibited.
 97. 32 CFR, Part 199. 6a(3), Tricare-authorized providers.
 98. US Department of Defense, Standards of Conduct Office. Encyclopedia of Ethical Failure. Washington, DC: DoD; 2016.
