257
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
Chapter 18
JOINT HEALTH SERVICES SUPPORT: 
OPERATIONAL PLANNING
JAMES F. SCHWARTZ,* MEGAN C. MULLER,† and CONRAD R. WILMOSKI‡
INTRODUCTION
THE PLANNING PROCESS
PLANNING INITIATION
MISSION ANALYSIS
Overview
Define the Operational Environment
Determine Specified, Implied, and Essential Tasks
Identify Available Resources and Shortfalls
COURSE OF ACTION DEVELOPMENT, ANALYSIS, COMPARISON, AND 
APPROVAL
Course of Action Development
Course of Action Analysis (War-Gaming)
Course of Action Comparison and Approval
RESOURCES
SUMMARY
*Lieutenant Colonel (Retired), Medical Service Corps, US Army; Assistant Professor and Chief of Staff, Department of Military & Emergency Medicine, 
F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 
†Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Executive Officer, 264th Medical Battalion, 32nd Medical Brigade, Joint Base San Antonio-Fort Sam Houston, 
Texas
‡Major, Medical Service Corps, US Army; Sustainment Branch, Concepts and Capabilities Division, Health Readiness Center of Excellence, Capability 
Development Integration Directorate, Joint Base San Antonio-Fort Sam Houston, Texas
258
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Scenario: You are the unit surgeon of a 1,000-person 
ground combat unit. Your unit has been deployed to Country 
X for 8 months. Morale is high with the anticipation of going 
home in 4 months. The unit has had adequate rest and has 
not conducted a combat operation in the last 7 days. Your 
commander has just alerted the staff of an impending mission within the next 3 days to conduct a raid on a suspected 
enemy weapons cache located in a mid-size town in the 
mountainous region of the country. The road system near 
the town is primarily comprised of two major paved roads 
leading to the town with multiple secondary and tertiary 
unimproved gravel and dirt roads. The town is described as 
rectangular, blocked with numerous multilevel buildings, 
alleys, and courtyard; there are limited open spaces, lots, 
or fields within the town (Figure 18-1). The town road 
structure is accompanied by electric power poles and lines; 
road barricades and obstacles have been observed at various locations throughout the town. Population is less than 
3,000. The enemy uses guerilla tactics, improvised explosive 
devices (IEDs), rocket-propelled grenades, and small arms. 
The enemy force is estimated to be 30 to 50 fighters. Intelligence suggests the enemy will provide heavy resistance to 
44
DAVENPORT BLVD
KALILI AVE
JANUS DR.
44
13
Figure 18-1. Notional town.
defend the town as a strategic location for weapons smuggling and cache operations. The mission is expected to be 
conducted during darkness, with limited moon illumination; 
temperatures will range between 60°F and 85°F; there will 
be light winds, a 10% chance of rain, with ceilings expected 
to be at greater than 10,000 ft, and visibility greater than 
7 miles. The executive officer has called together the staff to 
begin the planning process. 
Planning is a team sport. A medical staff officer 
(MSO) is a member of a larger staff that will come 
together to develop a comprehensive operational plan 
for joint health services support (HSS). As a special 
staff officer to the commander, the medical officer is 
expected to be involved in the planning process as an 
expert in all things medical. Joint Publication 5-0, Joint 
Operations Planning, defines the joint operation planning process (JOPP) as “an orderly, analytical process, 
which consists of a set of logical steps to examine a 
mission; develop, analyze, and compare alternative 
Courses of Action (COAs); select the best COA; and 
produce a plan or order.”1 Each service component has 
its own planning process that closely mirrors the JOPP; 
259
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
the Army uses the military decision-making process, 
while the Marine Corps uses the Marine Corps planning process (see Resources, below). 
Although this chapter focuses primarily on tacticallevel planning, the principles and processes are very 
much the same at the tactical, operational, and strategic 
levels—just from a different perspective. Strategiclevel planning focuses on national policy and theater 
strategy, while the operational level links strategy and 
tactics by establishing operational objectives needed 
to achieve military end-states and strategic objectives. 2 
Tactical planning involves the employment of tactics, 
techniques, and procedures and the arrangement of 
forces to achieve a military objective. At all three levels, 
MSOs are focused on many of the same key aspects, 
such as the mission, the operational area, the threats, 
the number and type of personnel involved in the 
mission, and the operational timeline. The major difference among these levels when planning HSS is the 
breadth and width of the plan. At the strategic level, the 
MSO focuses on determining the types and quantities 
of medical assets required to deploy in support of a 
theater strategy; at the tactical level, the MSO focuses 
on how best to employ medical assets on the ground 
to support a battle, engagement, or small-unit action in 
support of a specific military objective. The operational 
level ties tactical actions to strategic goals.
MSOs must have a solid grasp of their service’s 
planning process. Although each service may label 
specific steps of their planning process differently, the 
processes are essentially the same (Table 18-1 compares 
the JOPP and services’ planning processes). This chapter will provide a general overview of the key steps in 
the planning process and the accompanying medical 
actions. 3 It is important to recognize that each step of the 
planning process has multiple sub-steps; for example 
the Army’s military decision-making process mission 
analysis step consists of 18 sub-steps. This chapter will 
not necessarily go into detail for each step, but leaves 
it to the reader to research their specific service’s planning doctrine for additional information and guidance. 
This chapter is not intended to replace Department 
of Defense or service doctrine, but rather to provide a 
brief overview of the process and applicable resources. 
It is important to keep in mind that the planning 
process can be extremely time consuming; the reader 
should not assume from this brief introduction that the 
planning can be done quickly (although the services 
do have a process for planning in time-constrained environments). Lastly, to truly become comfortable with 
the planning process takes more than reading about 
it—it requires experience. Take advantage of opportunities to be involved in the process; the more you practice, the 
better you will become.
TABLE 18-1
SERVICE-SPECIFIC OPERATIONAL PLANNING
JOINT (JOPP)1
ARMY (MDMP)2
NAVY (NPP)3
MARINE CORPS 
(MCPP)4
AIR FORCE (JOPPA)5
Planning initiation
Receipt of the mission
Mission analysis
Problem framing
Mission analysis
Mission analysis
Mission analysis
COA development
COA development
COA development
COA development
COA development
COA analysis
COA analysis
COA analysis
COA war game
COA analysis 
COA comparison
COA comparison
COA comparison and 
decision
COA comparison and 
decision
COA comparison
COA approval
COA approval
COA approval
Orders production
Orders production
Orders development
Orders development
Orders production
Transition
Transition
AFPP: Air Force planning process; COA: course of action; JOPPA: joint operation planning process for air; MCPP: Marine Corps planning 
process; MDMP: military decision-making process; NPP: Navy planning process
1. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint Operations Planning. Washington, DC: JCS; 11 August 2011. Joint Publication 5-0.
2. Headquarters, Department of the Army. Commander and Staff Organization and Operations. Washington, DC: HQDA; May 2014. Field 
Manual 6-0.
3. Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. Navy Planning. Washington, DC: CNO; December 2013. Navy Warfare 
Publication 5-01. 
4. Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US Marine Corps. Marine Corps Planning Process. Washington, DC: USMC; 24 August 2010. Marine 
Corps Warfighting Publication 5-1.
5. Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. Operations and Planning. Washington, DC: USAF; 4 November 2016. Doctrinal Annex 3-0.
260
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
THE PLANNING PROCESS
HSS planning is tethered to operational planning. 
Upon receipt of the mission, planning begins with a detailed analysis of mission variables; continues through 
the development, analysis, and selection of a course of 
action (COA); and proceeds to the production of orders. The approach to HSS planning and tactical planning is analogous to a method all healthcare providers 
are familiar with: the scientific method. The six steps 
of the scientific method—purpose/question, research, 
hypothesis, experiment, data/analysis, and conclusion—correlate to the MSO’s approach to a mission 
or problem and plan development. Still another way 
to think about HSS planning is comparing it to a treatment plan for a patient. Most healthcare providers are 
familiar with the use of the “SOAP note”—Subjective, 
Objective, Assessment, Plan (Figure 18-2). The SOAP 
note provides the healthcare provider a methodical, 
standardized process for analyzing signs, symptoms, 
lab results, and imaging; assessing alternative diagnoses; and developing a patient treatment plan, including 
COAs that must weigh the patient’s preferences, the 
outcomes of earlier steps, and the inherent risks of 
each COA. The military planning process provides the 
MSO that same orderly, analytical process to examine 
a mission and produce a plan or order.
A word about communicating: throughout the planning process, the MSO must actively communicate—
with higher headquarters, with fellow staff officers, 
with adjacent units and organizations, and lastly, with 
subordinate units and organizations. Often, parallel 
planning is being conducted by higher, adjacent, and 
subordinate units. As more information becomes available and plans begin to form, information is shared. 
As the MSO progresses through the planning process, 
information is shared in an effort to provide the unit 
that will execute the mission the greatest opportunity 
for success. Bottom line: communicate, communicate, and 
communicate.
PLANNING INITIATION
Planning begins when a mission is directed (Exhibit 18-1). Upon receipt of the mission, the commander issues planning guidance, and the staff 
gathers planning resources: orders, current estimates 
or evaluations, maps, overlays, and graphics. The 
MSO must be involved early in the planning process. 
Failure to get involved early in the process could 
result in an incomplete plan; an unsynchronized 
plan; a plan that places the unit at an exceeding high 
risk, a risk that could have been mitigated if known 
earlier; or a plan that is directed rather than developed in partnership with the staff. The importance 
of establishing trust and credibility as a member 
of the commander’s special staff is discussed more 
fully in Chapter 14, Introduction to Health Service 
Support; these efforts are essential to the MSO’s early 
and ongoing involvement in mission planning. Once 
guidance is received and resources are collected, the 
staff begins the most important step of the process: 
mission analysis. It must be emphasized, however, 
that HSS planning is an iterative process. New information, as well as further guidance from the 
commander, may cause the staff to revisit any step 
of the planning process. Additionally, at each step 
in the process, the staff should attempt to convert 
planning assumptions into facts.
MISSION ANALYSIS
Overview
The next step in developing the plan, at the 
strategic through tactical levels, is to conduct a 
thorough mission analysis. Mission analysis is the 
most important step of the planning process. For the 
healthcare provider, this can be equated to doing a 
total “work-up” on the patient, including a thorough 
history, physical examination, records review to 
find previous diagnoses and treatments, laboratory 
tests, and x-rays. Mission analysis begins with a 
thorough study of the higher headquarters’ plan or 
order. Answers to following questions are critical to 
understanding the mission: 
What is the higher commander’s intent?
What is the concept of the operation?
What assets are available?
What is the timeline?
What is the area of operations?
The commander and staff conduct a mission analysis to better understand the situation and problem, and 
identify what the command must accomplish, when and 
where it must be done, and most importantly why—the 
purpose of the operation. 4 Staff must then compile 
what is known about the situation, that is, what relevant facts have impact on the mission and what valid 
261
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
Figure 18-2. The medical “SOAP note” format.
EXHIBIT 18-1
PLANNING INITIATION
 
1. Alert the staff.
 
2. Gather resources.
 
3. Issue commander’s guidance.
planning assumptions can be made about the situation. What does the operational environment look 
like, including the enemy situation? What constraints, 
if any, are placed on the command? What resources 
are required to complete the mission, and what resources are available? How much time is allotted for 
planning? What is the duration of the mission? And 
finally, what tasks are required for success? Variables 
such as these—mission, threat, resources, and time, 
along with a thorough understanding of the problem 
and situation—provide the foundation for follow-on 
planning and are critical to the success of the mission. 
The Army and Marine Corps categorize mission variables for tactical planning as Mission, Enemy, Terrain 
and weather, Troops and support available, Time available, 
and Civilian considerations (METT-TC). Every mission 
must be adjusted for the realities of METT-TC. 
Define the Operational Environment
This step requires the MSO to conduct a detailed 
analysis of the operational environment. The analysis 
of the operational environment includes evaluating 
the METT-TC variables enemy, terrain and weather, and 
civilian considerations. Depending on the mission and 
scope of the operation, it might also include evaluating variables such as political, military, economic, 
social, information, and infrastructure strengths and 
weaknesses. Each staff section assesses the operational 
environment from their perspective and develops 
what is referred to as “a staff estimate.” The MSO must 
assess the operational environment for those variables 
that can impact both the success of the operational 
mission (ie, what can impact the commander’s ability to accomplish the mission) as well as the medical 
mission (ie, what can impact the health of the troops 
and the healthcare team’s ability to accomplish their 
HSS mission). 
Patient Presents
Step 1: Subjective
Component
Step 2: Objective 
Component
Step 3: 
Assessment
Step 4: 
Plan
Onset 
Location
Character (sharp, dull, etc)
Alleviating/Aggravating
Vital Signs
Finding from physical 
examinations such as 
posture, bruising and 
abnormalities
Results for laboratory 
tests
Measurements such as 
age and weight of the 
patient
 
Is a quick summary of the patient with main 
symptoms/diagnosis including a differential diagnosis: a list of other possible diagnoses
usually in order of most likely to least likely. 
This is what the healthcare provider will do to treat 
the patient’s concern.
Radiation
Temporal pattern (every 
morning, all day, etc)
Symptoms associated
O
A
P
S
262
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Defining the many variables that frame the operational area is commonly referred to as intelligence 
preparation of the battlefield, or IPB. The medical equivalency is commonly referred to as medical intelligence 
preparation of the operational environment (MIPOE), or 
the medical intelligence preparation of the battlefield. It is 
through MIPOE that threats become known, and the 
MSO can begin to visualize their impact on the operational and medical mission. Depending on the level 
of consideration (tactical, operational, or strategic), 
intelligence used to identify the threat will probably 
originate from different sources; the strategic planning 
level will likely include national and geographic intelligence resources, whereas at the tactical level, local 
intelligence will most likely be heavily relied on to 
identify the immediate threat to the mission. The unit 
intelligence officer (S-2 or G-2) is a valuable resource 
for helping to define the operational environment. 
All available intelligence resources, including fellow 
staff officers and even units and personnel who have 
previously operated in the area, should be consulted 
to accurately describe the operational environment 
and identify the threats.
Enemy considerations include analyzing the type 
of enemy units involved (eg, mechanized, armor, light 
infantry, special operations, maritime, aviation); types 
and capabilities of equipment and weapon systems; 
and the enemy’s strength, location, and probable 
COAs. These considerations should give the MSO 
insight into probable mechanisms of injury, and possibly when and how these injuries may occur. Furthermore, evaluating the enemy can provide insight 
into the threat and risk to medical assets, specifically 
medical personnel, ground and air ambulances, and 
treatment facilities. 
Terrain considerations include assessing the operational environment for key terrain, avenues of 
approach, points of observations and fields of fire, 
obstacles, and areas that afford cover and concealment. A detailed analysis of the terrain should give 
the MSO insight into where casualties may occur, for 
example, near key terrain such as beachheads, river 
crossings, or choke points; on avenues of approach; or 
at obstacles. It should also highlight potential mobility corridors, evacuation routes, landing zones, and 
areas to establish treatment, in addition to possible 
hazards to personnel, equipment, and operations. 
The terrain analysis can also provide insight into the 
types of potential injuries (eg, urban terrain may yield 
more crushing injuries, electrocutions, or upper body 
gunshot injuries due to snipers, while mountainous 
terrain may yield more musculoskeletal injuries, cold 
injuries, and altitude sickness). Weather considerations include visibility, winds, precipitation, cloud 
cover, temperature, and humidity. These conditions 
can impact aviation and ground operations (Figure 
18-3), the navigability of roads, and again, the types of 
potential injuries (eg, heat, cold, hypothermia). These 
three variables, enemy, terrain, and weather, provide 
extremely valuable pieces of the puzzle. When pieced 
together, they provide a fairly comprehensive picture 
of the operational environment and its impact on the 
operational and medical mission. 
Although this example is very simple, in the 
opening scenario of this chapter the enemy may be 
described as a well-armed enemy force of 30 to 50 
fighters who predominantly use small-arms weapons 
and IEDs, and who employ guerilla-type techniques. 
The geographical environment is urban with a population of less than 3,000; it is rectangular blocked with 
numerous multilevel buildings, alleys, and courtyards; 
it has limited open spaces, lots, or fields; there are road 
barricades and obstacles; and power lines are strung 
throughout the area. Mountain ranges are to the north 
and east; open flat terrain to the south and west. Major 
improved roads run west to east and north and south 
through the town. A river runs from north to south 
through the town. The staff will analyze an actual operational environment in much greater detail in order 
to develop a comprehensive picture; this “picture” will 
be used for follow-on COA development, analysis, and 
comparison (Figure 18-4). 
Figure 18-3. An MV-22 Osprey with Marine Medium Tiltrotor Squadron 161 prepares to land in southern Helmand 
province, Afghanistan, December 9, 2012. The Osprey was 
picking up coalition and Afghan government officials following a visit to a remote area. The officials were checking the 
status of a 6th Zone Afghan Border Police clearing operation. 
Photo by Sgt. John Jackson. 
Reproduced from: https://www.dvidshub.net/image/797378/
afghan-border-police-conduct-independent-clearingoperation-southern-helmand.
263
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
Vignette 18-1. Air Force Captain Matthew Miller wrote 
about the challenges of flying in Afghanistan after returning 
from a four-month deployment there in 2007. His medevac 
unit, from Georgia’s Moody Air Force Base, had lost three 
helicopters and seven crew members in the two wars. Enemy fire had been a factor in none of the Afghan crashes. 
“In Iraq, helicopter pilots face a greater prospect of being shot at by ground fire,” Miller wrote. “In Afghanistan, 
the greatest threat is the terrain.” He described flying in 
Afghanistan as “graduate level” piloting more challenging 
than cruising over the flatlands of Iraq. “It didn’t take long 
to feel the perils of mountainous flying in Afghanistan,” he 
added. “Between Iraq and Afghanistan, most helicopter 
pilots I’ve spoken to consider Afghanistan the more dangerous place to fly.”5 
Key to mission analysis is not only accurately defining the operational environment, but also interpreting 
how the environment impacts the mission. For example, the MSO may discover that the road structure 
near the objective is narrow, with multiple choke 
points. From this data point, the MSO may deduce that 
casualty evacuation will be slowed, or some areas may 
be impassable, and therefore alternative evacuation 
routes will be needed. Again, it is important that the 
MSO not only accurately defines the operational environment, but just as importantly, translates that data 
into useful and meaningful information. An inaccurate 
or incomplete mission analysis will sabotage the planning 
process and could very well lead to catastrophic results. 
Determine Specified, Implied, and Essential Tasks
A mission statement always consists of five parts: 
the who (organization to act), what (the task to be accomplished and actions to be taken), when (time to 
accomplish the task), where (the location to accomplish 
the task), and why (the purpose the task is to support). 1 
Notice that the how is not addressed at this time. During the planning process, how the unit will accomplish 
the mission is conceptualized and analyzed after the 
staff has developed a full understanding of the tasks 
that must be accomplished, that is, the mission, the 
state of the operational environment, and the resources 
available. It is important for the MSO to have a thorough understanding of the tasks required for both 
medical and operational success. 
Figure 18-4. Notional town with the addition of major geographic terrain features.
264
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
A task is a clearly defined action or activity assigned to an individual or organization. 1 Tasks fall 
into three categories: specified, implied, and essential. A 
specified task is a task specifically assigned to a unit 
by its higher headquarters. An implied task is one that 
must be performed to accomplish a specified goal or 
mission, but is not stated in the higher headquarters’ 
order. Implied tasks are typically derived from a 
detailed analysis of the operations order or plan, the 
operational environment, civil considerations, and 
other factors. An essential task, which can be either 
specified or implied, must be executed to accomplish 
the mission. Essential tasks are always included in the 
unit’s mission statement. 
In the introductory scenario example, due to the 
expected intensity of the fight, the commander of the 
ground combat unit has instructed his medical platoon 
leader to deploy a medical team to a forward position 
in proximity to the objective to provide responsive 
casualty care during the battalion raid. In this scenario, the specified, implied, and essential tasks are 
as follows:
 
• Specified task: “Provide treatment and 
evacuation in support of the battalion mission.” This task is essential to mission success. 
 
• Implied task: Conduct reconnaissance to 
determine the best location for the medical 
team in proximity to the objective. This task, 
although not specifically stated, is implied 
by the commander and should be inferred by 
the medical platoon leader to accomplish the 
above specified task.
 
• Essential task: “Provide treatment and evacuation in support of the battalion mission.” This 
task is both specified and essential to mission 
success.
It is critical for the MSO to understand the mission 
tasked to their unit, to thoroughly review the operation 
order or plan to identify all specified medical tasks, as 
well as related implied tasks, and finally to be sure of 
the essential medical tasks. Many HSS tasks are found 
in the operation order or plan’s paragraph 4 (administration and logistics) and the HSS annex (Exhibit 
18-2). It is critical to remember that the mission is the task, 
together with the purpose, that clearly indicates the action 
to be taken and the reason.
During the mission analysis, the personnel officer 
and MSO begin to formulate an approximate casualty 
estimate. Although determining the casualty rate is 
the responsibility of the personnel officer; the MSO 
is responsible for patient estimates, which include 
only the medical casualties (patients) included in the 
overall casualty rate. 6 According to Army Techniques 
Publication 4-02. 55, Army Health System Support Planning, “patient” is the generic term applied to a sick, 
injured, or wounded person who receives medical care 
or treatment from medically trained personnel. Once a 
casualty is treated by the first medically trained person 
(normally the combat medic, corpsman, or independent duty medical technician), he or she is no longer 
referred to as a casualty and is subsequently referred 
to as a patient. The casualty estimate is based on information derived from an analysis of the operational 
environment, specifically, from the enemy’s capabilities, strength, and morale; the terrain and weather; and 
the unit’s mission. The casualty estimate will be further 
refined during COA development and analysis, when 
specific operational plans with more defined troop 
employments and movements on the battlefield will 
be developed. 6,7 
Vignette 18-2. The Naval Health Research Center 
(NHRC) developed the Joint Medical Planning Tool (JMPT), 
a computer-based simulation tool that models patient flow 
from the point of injury through more definitive care. It supports research, medical systems analysis, operational risk 
assessment, and field medical services planning. NHRC 
also developed the Medical Planners’ Toolkit (MPTk), which 
consists of the Patient Condition Occurrence Frequency 
(PCOF) tool, the Casualty Rate Estimation Tool (CREstT), the 
Expeditionary Medicine Requirements Estimator (EMRE), 
and the Estimating Supplies Program (ESP). The PCOF 
tool provides baseline probability distributions for illnesses 
and injuries across a range of 33 military operations. The 
CREstT provides the capability to emulate the operational 
plan using a 180-day scenario to calculate battle and nonbattle injuries and illnesses that are expected during ground 
military operations. The EMRE estimates operating room, 
intensive care unit, ward and bed, evacuation, and blood 
product requirements for in-theater hospitalization, based 
on a given patient load. The ESP uses scenario-specific 
patient streams created by CREstT and known medical 
supply inventories to estimate the total supply requirement 
for treating those patients. 8 
EXHIBIT 18-2
FIVE-PARAGRAPH OPERATION ORDER 
FORMAT
 
1. Situation
 
2. Mission
 
3. Execution
 
4. Administration and logistics
 
5. Command and signal
265
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
Identify Available Resources and Shortfalls
Once the MSO has defined the operational environment, identified the mission and tasks, and begun 
to develop a preliminary casualty estimate, they can 
begin considering the capabilities needed to support the mission. At the tactical level, this variable is 
sometimes referred to as troops and support available. 
When analyzing resources, the MSO should consider 
both medical and nonmedical personnel, equipment, 
supplies, and organizations available to support the 
medical mission. The MSO should also note the total 
number of personnel or troops involved in the mission, 
sometimes referred to as the population at risk (PAR). 
The PAR data point is important for determining the 
number of medical resources required and the positioning of these resources in support of the operation. 
Along with determining the number of personnel 
involved in the operation, the MSO analyzes the type 
of personnel involved in the mission, as well as their 
operational and medical readiness, training readiness, 
morale, psychological state, nutrition, rest, and clothing and equipment. 
The level of planning being conducted (strategic, 
operational, or tactical) will dictate the level of detail 
need in resource assessment. For example, tactical 
MSOs focus on the number of medics, ground ambulances, and tactical aeromedical evacuation in support 
of a specific operation, whereas strategic-level MSOs 
look at the number of hospital beds, surgical suites 
(operating room hours and intensive care beds), strategic aeromedical evacuation, and medical specialties 
available to support a theater strategy (Figure 18-5). 
HSS planning considerations (Exhibit 18-3) should be 
kept in mind during mission analysis. These considerations provide an excellent checklist regardless of the 
level of planning; however, not every consideration is 
applicable to every mission. For example, planning for 
support of a tactical mission such as a small unit raid 
probably does not require the MSO to plan specifically 
for pharmacy services, but an MSO at the operational 
level planning for a campaign must consider and plan 
for these services.
EXHIBIT 18-3
HEALTH SERVICES SUPPORT PLANNING 
CONSIDERATIONS
 
• Threat identification
 
• Clinical capabilities
 
• Host nation support
 
• Medical intelligence
 
• Dental services
 
• Health services support (HSS) for returned 
US prisoners of war and detained persons
 
• HSS for detainees 
 
• Preventive medicine and health surveillance
 
• Pharmacy services 
 
• Prevention of stress casualties
 
• Medical logistics (MEDLOG)
 
• Patient movement
 
• Patient movement items 
 
• Veterinary services
 
• Mass casualty situations
 
• Additional HSS considerations
Figure 18-5. Blackhawk helicopter for medical aero evacuation. The Task Force Marauder medical evacuation (medevac) company participated in a mass casualty exercise with 
the Role 3 hospital, December 23, 2017, in Afghanistan to 
practice and refine procedures in the event of a real-world 
emergency. Detachment 1, Charlie Company, 2-211th General Support Aviation Battalion (GSAB), MEDEVAC, Iowa 
National Guard, with Task Force Marauder partnered with 
the hospital, base emergency medical services, Polish special 
forces, US Air Force security forces, and US Army 82nd Airborne service members for the exercise. C Co, 2-211th GSAB 
(MEDEVAC) provided aerial transportation and en route 
medical care for simulated casualties before transporting the 
patients to the hospital for follow-on care. The purpose of 
the exercise was to test current practices and communication 
in a controlled environment. Task Force Marauder consists 
of soldiers from South Carolina National Guard, Illinois 
National Guard, and Iowa National Guard, as well as an 
active duty component, and provides aviation capabilities 
with AH64 Apaches, UH60 Black Hawks, CH47 Chinooks, 
and medevac assets in Afghanistan under the 3rd Combat 
Aviation Brigade while deployed. (US Army National Guard 
photo by Capt. Jessica Donnelly, Task Force Marauder.)
Reproduced from: https://www.dvidshub.net/
image/4050146/task-force-marauder-participates-masscasualty-exercise.
266
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Medical Resources
When assessing the medical resources available to 
support the operational mission, both medical assets 
that are organic to nonmedical organizations (eg, a 
medical platoon assigned to an infantry battalion), 
and specifically missioned medical organizations 
(eg, medical company, surgical company), must be 
considered. The full continuum of available resources 
to consider includes all personnel, medical organizations and their current capabilities, medical logistics, 
patient movement assets (both medical and nonmedical), patient movement items, and host nation assets. 
One method for this step is to take an inventory of 
HSS assets available and their capability across the 
continuum of care; eventually the MSO will compare 
this inventory with the capabilities needed to successfully support the mission to determine medical support 
gaps. The MSO must then communicate any known 
shortfalls, and the risks associated with these gaps, to 
higher headquarters.
During mission analysis in the introductory scenario, staff may have determined that due to the enemy’s capability and tactics, there is a high probability 
the mission will generate trauma surgical casualties 
(remember, translate what is discovered during mission analysis into useful and meaningful information). 
For this mission, the healthcare provider would want 
to ensure that internal assets are available, equipped, 
trained, and positioned to support surgical casualties. Questions for the MSO to consider are: Do both 
medical and nonmedical personnel have the required 
medical supplies for the types of injuries they may 
encounter at the point of wounding (tourniquets, clotting agents, and compressed gauze)? Are personnel 
properly trained to treat these injuries? Additionally, 
the healthcare provider should ensure surgical assets 
are in a position to support the operation, both from 
a time/distance factor and the ability to readily accept 
casualties. 
Conducting the analysis of support available 
provides the MSO with the information needed to 
support COA development, analysis, and eventual 
recommendation to the commander. If surgical assets 
are not in a position to provide timely support, the 
provider has identified a capability gap that must be 
mitigated. In this case a surgical asset might be temporarily relocated to provide timely support, or an 
evacuation asset could be relocated closer to the fight 
to provide a faster time from wounding to forward 
resuscitative surgery capability. A good technique 
is to trace the continuity of care from the unit to the 
next higher role of care. For example, a provider at 
a Role 1 aid station should trace a casualty from the 
point of injury to Role 2 and a forward resuscitative 
surgical capability. This would entail identifying who 
will provide care from the point of injury to Role 
2; evacuation methods from the point of injury to 
Role 2; the means to provide medical resupply; and 
the means to communicate throughout the medical 
continuity chain.
Vignette 18-3. During mission analysis for each of our 
operations [1st Battalion/505th Parachute Infantry Regiment in Fallujah, Iraq], the principles that we have detailed 
[prevention, proportion, preparation, portability, proximity, 
protection, and projection] . . . were taken into account. 
These principles were developed through our close interaction with our line commanders and battalion staff (in regular 
daily briefings, informal discussions during the planning 
process, and even over conversations at meal time). We 
were able to use their knowledge and experience in infantry 
operations and combine it with our medical knowledge and 
experience to develop medical coverage for the task force 
upon which both command and medical providers agreed. 9
Time
Another critical resource to consider is time available. For most planning, time is not infinite. The MSO 
must consider, especially at the tactical and operational 
level, the amount of time required to prepare for mission execution. The MSO must ensure that those who 
will execute the mission are provided ample time to 
prepare. The typical rule of thumb at the tactical level 
is a 1:2 ratio of leaders to staff (ie, the MSO utilizes 
one-third of the time, leaving two-thirds of the time 
for subordinates to plan and prepare to execute the 
mission). Time, obviously, is the one resource that is 
nonrenewable; it must be used wisely.
Risk Management
Risk management is the process of identifying, assessing, and controlling risks arising from operational 
factors and making decisions that balance risk cost 
with mission benefits. 2 The medical planner should 
address the hazards associated with the operational 
environment, such as food- and water-borne illnesses, 
disease vectors, person-to-person transmission of disease, harmful animals and toxic plants, environmental 
risks, and likely battle and nonbattle injuries. The planner should also identify control measures that can be 
implemented to mitigate these hazards. Although the 
risk management process is fairly consistent among 
the services, each service has doctrinal publications 
that outline their specific process. 6,10–13 
The mission analysis is completed with the commander issuing their initial intent, planning guidance, 
267
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
and evaluation criteria that will be used during COA 
selection. Mission analysis will begin to bring HSS 
requirements into focus; while COA development and 
analysis (war-gaming) will bring refinement to the HSS 
requirements. Joint Publication 4-02, Healthcare Service 
Support, fully discusses HSS considerations. 3
COURSE OF ACTION DEVELOPMENT, ANALYSIS, COMPARISON, AND APPROVAL
Course of Action Development 
Following mission analysis, staff begin developing 
COAs that meet the commander’s intent and the stated 
mission. A COA is a potential how (proposed solution 
or method) to accomplish the assigned mission. 1 All 
COAs, along with supporting medical plans, must 
adhere to specific screening criteria to ensure validity: 
each COA must be adequate, feasible, acceptable, distinguishable, and complete. 1 A healthcare provider might 
equate this step to the treatment plan to cure or manage 
a patient’s illness. COA development entails assessing 
the friendly versus enemy forces, generating options, 
arraying the forces, developing a broad concept, and 
finally, developing COA statements and sketches. 
During COA development, the MSO applies the 
information learned from the mission analysis coupled 
with the operational COA to develop a synchronized 
medical support plan. It is important to understand 
that the mission analysis, to a great extent, determines 
the medical capability requirements. The operational 
COA further defines requirements, as well as driving 
the employment of the medical capability requirements in the form a medical support plan. At this point 
the MSO should reflect back on the principles of HSS 
(conformity, control, continuity, proximity, mobility, and 
flexibility; see Chapter 14), and the medical and HSS 
planning considerations, whether the plan is strategic 
or tactical. The MSO should begin overlaying medical support capabilities onto the operational plan and 
sketching out a medical support plan specific to each 
operational COA.
Furthermore, casualty estimates can become more 
refined during COA development. Lastly, the MSO has 
the responsibility to communicate any known medical 
support risks to the operational plan. The commander 
must know the risks a specific operational plan may 
pose to medical support capabilities, and the staff has 
the responsibility to mitigate risks as much as possible. 
The commander makes the final decision on whether 
to accept the risk or not for each COA as the final operational plan is selected.
Course of Action Analysis (War-Gaming)
Following COA development, the next planning 
phase is COA analysis. During this phase, the staff 
methodically examines each COA to determine more 
precisely its advantages and disadvantages and the 
likelihood that it will achieve the mission. COA analysis is conducted through “war-gaming,” in which the 
commander and staff visualize the plan set against 
the operational environment and enemy forces. Wargaming helps identify advantages and disadvantages, 
execution and coordination problems, operational 
gaps, points of decision-making, and contingencies. 
COA war-gaming can be conducted in various ways; 
the easiest and most basic is to war-game the plan by 
critical event or phase through a table-top method using the action, reaction, and counteraction moves of 
friendly and enemy forces. For the MSO, war-gaming 
is also an opportunity to analyze the COA for casualtyproducing events and required HSS support. 
Course of Action Comparison and Approval
Following COA analysis, the commander and staff 
conduct a COA comparison. Using the evaluation 
criteria identified during mission analysis and refined 
during COA development and analysis, they identify 
strengths and weakness and determine the best COA. 
Common methods for evaluating COAs include nonweighted, weighted, advantages/disadvantages, and 
pluses/minuses/neutral comparison matrices. COAs of 
friendly forces are not compared against each other; 
rather, they are independently compared against predicted enemy COAs, using agreed-upon evaluation 
criteria. The COA with the superior rating typically 
becomes the COA recommended to the commander. 
Functional staff officers, including the MSO, conduct a COA comparison based on their respective 
functional areas and provide their recommendation 
as part of the overall COA comparison. Just as the operational staff compares COAs to identify the strongest 
one for a successful mission, the MSO compares them 
to identify the strongest in terms of medical support. 
It may be possible to use the same evaluation criteria 
for the operational and medical COAs, or they might 
require different criteria. The medical COA might use 
evaluation criteria such as proximity to the operational 
forces, casualty estimate, or ground evacuation routes. 
It is incumbent upon the MSO to honestly evaluate the 
medical support COAs and provide the commander 
with the best recommendation. 
Once the commander approves an operational 
COA, the staff begin developing the orders or plan. 
268
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Planning Initiation 
 Receive the Mission 
 Alert the Staff 
 Gather Orders, Estimates, Maps, & Graphics
 Seek Commander’s Guidance
Mission Analysis 
 Define the Operational Environment 
• How does the Operational Environment affect HSS 
planning? 
• What HSS resources are needed to mitigate 
operational environment threats? 
• Begin thinking about the type of casualties and 
the number of casualties. 
 Determine Specified, Implied & Essential Tasks 
 What HSS tasks must be accomplished to support the 
unit’s mission?
 Review Available Assets & Identify Resource 
Shortfalls 
 What assets are assigned, attached or in support of 
the HSS mission? 
 What assets do you need to accomplish your mission? 
 Think about the operational environment, identified 
tasks, and potential types and number of casualties ‐ 
review the HSS planning considerations – what is 
missing that is needed? 
 Determine Constraints 
 How do the constraints placed on the unit impact the 
HSS Plan? 
 What constraints do the Medical Rules of 
Engagement (MROE) place on the HSS mission? 
 Identify Critical Facts & Key Assumptions 
 What do you know to be true? What critical facts 
impact the HSS mission?
 What assumptions must be made to bridge any gaps 
in factual data? 
 Commander’s Critical Information Requirement 
 Is there any critical medical planning information that 
is key to the commander’s decision‐making? 
 Information Collection Plan 
 Is there any additional information that 
reconnaissance, surveillance or intelligence can assist 
you with planning? 
 Begin Risk Management 
 What hazards are associated with the Operational 
Environment?
 Consider Food/Water‐Borne, Vectors, Person‐to‐
Person, Animals and Plants, Environmental, Non‐
Battle and Battle Injuries.
 What control measures can be implemented to 
mitigate the hazards? 
 Develop a proposed mission statement 
 What is your unit’s mission? How do you medically 
support it? Refer back to your specified, implied and 
essential tasks. 
 Develop COA Evaluation Criteria 
 Identify evaluation criteria that will be used to 
measure the relative effectiveness and efficiency of 
one COA relative to other COAs. 
Course of Action Development 
 Develop medical support options. 
 Screening Criteria (Suitable, Feasible, Acceptable, 
Distinguishable, and Complete). 
 Develop a broad, synchronized scheme of 
medical support. 
 Begin to redefine casualty estimates. 
 Array medical forces. 
 Prepare COA Statement/Sketches. 
Course of Action Analysis 
 Conduct War‐game. 
 Identify advantages/disadvantages. 
 Execution & Coordination Problems. 
 Operational Gaps. 
 Points of Decision Making. 
 Contingencies. 
 Identify medical support risks to the operational plan.
 Identify casualty producing events. 
 Refine Casualty Estimates. 
Course of Action Comparison 
 Use evaluation criteria to compare COAs against 
enemy COA. 
 Provide functional recommendation as part of 
overall COA comparison. 
Course of Action Approval 
 Commander selects COA. 
 Issue Warning Order. 
Orders Production 
 Translate COA into plan/order. 
 Synchronize plan/order. 
 Issue OPORD. 
 Conduct Rehearsals. 
Figure 18-6. Operation planning process reference guide.
Figure 18-7. Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences students in planning exercise.
Photograph by Thomas C. Balfour, Uniformed Services 
University.
269
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
EXHIBIT 18-4
KEY POINTS FOR THE MEDICAL STAFF OFFICER
 
• Joint Publication 5-0 defines the joint operation planning process (JOPP) as “an orderly, analytical process, 
which consists of a set of logical steps to examine a mission; develop, analyze, and compare alternative COAs; 
select the best COA; and produce a plan or order.”1 
 
• The services have a planning process (MDMP, NPP, MCPP, JOPPA) that closely mirrors the joint operation 
planning process. 
 
• It is important to have a solid grasp of your service’s planning process.
 
• The MSO must be involved early in the planning process.
 
• Mission analysis is the most important step of the planning process. An inaccurate or incomplete mission 
analysis will sabotage the planning process and very well could lead to catastrophic results.
 
• Mission analysis assists with identifying support gaps and drives HSS capability requirements. 
 
• HSS planning considerations provide a “checklist” that the MSO can use during mission analysis and COA 
development. 
 
• It is critical to reflect on the principles of HSS and HSS planning considerations when developing support 
plans, whether strategic, operational, or tactical.
 
• The MSP must be synchronized with the operational plan.
 
• It is important to use all available intelligence resources, including fellow staff officers, units, and personnel 
that have previously operated in the area, to accurately identify the operational environment and the threat.
 
• It is important for the MSO to have a thorough understanding of the tasks that are required for success and 
where and how medical assets can support the mission.
 
• The MSO must communicate vertically and horizontally throughout the planning process. 
 
• Time is not infinite; remember the one-third to two-thirds rule.
 
• HSS planning is an iterative process. The MSO must be prepared to revisit any step of the planning process 
based on new information as well as guidance from the commander.
 
• The MSO has the responsibility to communicate any known medical support risks to the operational plan.
 
• Seek opportunities to be involved in the planning process. The more you practice, the better you will become.
COA: course of action; HSS: health services support; JOPPA: joint operation planning process for air; MCPP: Marine Corps planning 
process; MDMP: military decision-making process; MSO: medical staff officer; MSP: medical support plan: NPP: Navy planning process
1. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint Operations Planning. Washington, DC: JCS; 11 August 2011. Joint Publication 5-0.
The MSO’s role in the orders development process is 
to ensure the medical support plan is written into the 
operational plan, whether located in the operations 
order, plan, or supporting annex. Templates for orders, 
plans, and annexes can be found in joint and service 
component planning documents (see Resources). An 
operation planning process reference guide is provided in Figure 18-6, and key points for the MSO are 
list in Exhibit 18-4.
The processes and steps described above should be 
very familiar to students (Figure 18-7) and practitioners 
of the healing professions. As discussed earlier, clinicians will recognize the process of mission analysis, 
COA development, COA comparison, and selection of 
an operational plan as parallel to what ideally occurs 
in caring for patients. In partnership with the patient, 
the clinician seeks to understand the health challenges 
facing the patient, to appreciate the patient’s desires in 
achieving optimal health, to use current scientific insights and best practices to develop potentially competing COAs in managing the illness (diagnosing and treating), and ultimately arriving at the optimal approach, 
tailored to the individual patient and clinical situation. 
Because of these parallels, medical professionals are well 
positioned to adapt their skills in critical thinking to the 
demands of battlefield operational planning.
RESOURCES
Policy and practice change over time. Doctrine, 
that is, published official guidelines and policies, will 
change in content, but military references will retain 
their numeric designation. Listed below are the services’ primary planning documents and corresponding 
HSS or medical operations planning documents. They 
should be monitored over time for key principles and 
practices. In addition to doctrinal publications, MSOs 
270
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
should review after-action reports, lessons learned, 
and scholarly articles to hone planning skills. 14
Joint 
 
• Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint 
Operations Planning. Washington, DC: JCS; 11 
August 2011. Joint Publication 5-0.
 
• Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint 
Health Services. Washington, DC: JCS; 11 December 2017. Joint Publication 4-02.
Army
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Commander and Staff Organization and Operations. 
Washington, DC: HQDA; May 2014. Field 
Manual 6-0. 
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Army 
Health System Support Planning. Washington, 
DC: HQDA; September 2015. Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 4-02. 55.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Army. Risk 
Management. Washington, DC: HQDA; April 
2014. ATP 5-19.
Navy
 
• Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief 
of Naval Operations. Navy Planning. Washington, DC: CNO; December 2013. Navy Warfare 
Publication (NWP) 5-01. 
 
• Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief of 
Naval Operations. Naval Expeditionary Health 
Service Support Afloat and Ashore. Washington, 
DC: CNO; January 2008. NWP 4-02. 
 
• Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief 
of Naval Operations. Operational Risk Management. Washington, DC: CNO; 2 July 2010. 
Operational Navy Instruction 3500. 39C.
Marine Corps 
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US 
Marine Corps. Marine Corps Planning Process. 
Washington, DC: USMC; 24 August 2010. Marine Corps Warfighting Publication (MCWP) 
5-1.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US 
Marine Corps. Health Service Support Operations. Washington, DC: USMC; 10 December 
2012. MCWP 4-11. 1.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US 
Marine Corps. Risk Management. Washington, 
DC: USMC; 26 November 2014. Marine Corps 
Order 3500. 27C. 
Air Force
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Operations and Planning. Washington, DC: 
USAF; 4 November 2016. Doctrinal Annex 3-0.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Medical Operations. Washington, DC: USAF; 29 
September 2015. Air Force Doctrine Document 
4-02.
 
• Headquarters, Department of the Air Force. 
Risk Management (RM) Guidelines and Tools. 
Washington, DC: USAF; 27 July 2018. Air 
Force Pamphlet 90-803.
SUMMARY
This chapter provides only an introductory exposure to the planning process and the accompanying 
HSS planning considerations. The best way to learn 
and to master the planning process is to actively 
engage in actual operational planning, but planners 
should first have a general understanding of their 
service’s process—the steps, considerations, and 
functional (eg, medical) points of interaction with the 
warfighter. It is incumbent upon the MSO to acquire 
proficiency in planning. The documents listed in the 
Resources section should be a part of every healthcare 
provider’s library, or accessible through the Internet; 
they should routinely be referred to when engaged 
in planning. 
Additionally, healthcare providers must actively 
seek out opportunities to engage in planning, no matter the scope of the mission or size of the operation. 
Such opportunities include table-top exercises, mission rehearsal exercises, local field training exercises 
or events, mass casualty exercises, and deployments 
to national training centers. Another opportunity is 
participating in war-game scenarios with fellow staff 
officers; these interactions can be conducted over a cup 
of coffee and demonstrate that MSOs are a member of 
the team. Experienced personnel should be sought out 
for advice and mentoring. Finally, remember that no 
one should be “married to the plan”; once mastered, 
planning can be conducted slowly and deliberately 
or quickly and adeptly. Experience and proficiency in 
effective planning enhances adaptability in real-world 
events and is a key element to an MSO’s success in 
protecting and caring for those in uniform. 
271
Joint Health Services Support: Operational Planning
REFERENCES
 
1. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint Operations Planning. Washington, DC: JCS; 11 August 2011. Joint Publication 
5-0.
 
2. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint Operations, Washington, DC: JCS; 17 January 2017. Joint Publication 3-0:I12–I-14.
 
3. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Healthcare Service Support. Washington, DC: JCS; 26 July 2012. Joint Publication 
4-02.
 
4. Headquarters, Department of the Army. Commander and Staff Organization and Operations. Washington, DC: HQDA; 
May 2014. Field Manual 6-0. 
 
5. Thompson M. Why flying choppers in Afghanistan is so deadly. Time. http://content.time.com/time/nation/
article/0,8599,1932386,00.html. Published October 27, 2009. Accessed August 3, 2017.
 
6. Headquarters, Department of the Army. Army Health System Support Planning. Washington, DC: HQDA; September 
2015. Army Techniques Publication 4-02. 55.
 
7. Bricknell MC, Jones F, Hatzfeld J. Casualty estimation and medical resource planning. J Royal Army Med Corps. 
2011;157(Suppl 4). doi:10. 1136/jramc-157-4s-06. 
 
8. Naval Health Research Center. Modeling and simulation. https://www.med.navy.mil/sites/nhrc/research/orh/Pages/
Modeling-and-Sim.aspx. Accessed September 20, 2018.
 
9. Earwood JS, Brooks DE. The seven Ps in battalion level combat health support in the military operations in urban 
terrain environment: the Fallujah experience, summer 2003 to spring 2004. Mil Med. 2006;171(4):273–277. doi:10. 7205/
milmed. 171. 4. 273.
 10. Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. Navy Planning. Washington, DC: CNO; December 
2013. Navy Warfare Publication 5-01. 
 11. Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. Naval Expeditionary Health Service Support Afloat and 
Ashore. Washington, DC: CNO; January 2008. Navy Warfare Publication 4-02. 
 12. Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US Marine Corps. Marine Corps Planning Process. Washington, DC: USMC; 
24 August 2010. Marine Corps Warfighting Publication 5-1.
 13. Headquarters, Department of the Navy, US Marine Corps. Health Service Support Operations. Washington, DC: USMC; 
10 December 2012. Marine Corps Warfighting Publication 4-11. 1.
 14. Clay JD. The medical platoon leader and parallel planning. Army Logistician. Nov-Dec 2004. http://www.alu.army.
mil/alog/issues/novdec04/medical.html. Accessed September 20, 2018.
272
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
