325
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
Chapter 23
ENVIRONMENTAL EXTREMES: 
ALTERNOBARIC
RICHARD A. SCHEURING, DO, MS*; WILLIAM RAINEY JOHNSON, MD†; GEOFFREY E. CIARLONE, PhD‡; DAVID 
KEYSER, PhD§; NAILI CHEN, DO, MPH, MASc¥; and FRANCIS G. O’CONNOR, MD, MPH¶
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
MILITARY HISTORY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Altitude
Aviation 
Undersea Operations
MILITARY APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY
Altitude
Aviation 
Undersea Operations
HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES FOR EXTREME 
ENVIRONMENTS
Altitude
Aviation 
Undersea Operations
ONLINE RESOURCES FOR ALTERNOBARIC ENVIRONMENTS
SUMMARY
*Colonel, Medical Corps, US Army Reserve; Associate Professor, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
†Lieutenant, Medical Corps, US Navy; Undersea Medical Officer, Undersea Medicine Department, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
‡Lieutenant, Medical Service Corps, US Navy; Research Physiologist, Undersea Medicine Department, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, 
Maryland
§Program Director, Traumatic Injury Research Program; Assistant Professor, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
¥Colonel, Medical Corps, US Air Force; Assistant Professor, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, Maryland
¶Colonel (Retired), Medical Corps, US Army; Professor and former Department Chair, Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
326
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
INTRODUCTION
Service members on the modern-day battlefield 
confront a variety of environmental challenges, 
particularly since the emergence of unconventional, 
asymmetric, and hybrid warfare. Knowledge of the 
environmental challenges confronting fighters, and 
strategies to mitigate against stressors that degrade 
optimal performance and provide advantages against 
enemy combatants are essential for the military medical officer (MMO). This chapter focuses on pressure 
extremes as applied to today’s combat environment, 
at elevated altitudes, in aviation, and in undersea 
operations. The general term for alterations in ambient pressure is “alternobaric.” This chapter focuses 
on enabling the MMO to understand the alternobaric 
environment and take measures to enhance service 
members’ performance in alternobaric environments. 
Specifically discussed are core definitions applied to 
alternobarics, relevant military history and epidemiology, applicable applied physiology, and detailed 
prevention strategies. Specific guidance and resources 
are provided to assist the MMO in the identification 
and prevention of alternobaric stress.
TABLE 23-1 
ALTERNOBARIC APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY TERMINOLOGY 
Term
Definition
Absolute pressure
Total static pressure at the reference point; pressure relative to a vacuum.
Altitude diving
Diving at a location where the water surface is at an altitude that requires modification of decompression schedules (higher than about 300 m/980 ft above sea level).
Ambient pressure
Pressure of the environmental surroundings.
Ascent rate
Rate at which depth is reduced at the end of a dive; an important component of decompression.
ata
Atmospheres absolute; unit of absolute pressure equivalent to standard atmospheric pressure. 
1 ata = 1 bar = 760 mm Hg = 14. 7 psi = weight of the atmosphere.
Bottom time
Time used in calculating decompression obligation from decompression tables. For most tables, this 
is defined as the elapsed time from starting the descent to starting the final ascent to the surface, 
excluding ascent and decompression time.
Boyle’s law
At a constant temperature, the pressure (P) of a gas and its volume (V) are inversely related:
P1V1=P2V2
Clinically, a trapped gas in the body will expand as altitude increases because there is less pressure 
on it from the ambient atmosphere, or alternatively contract when altitude decreases or if taken to 
a depth underwater.
Charles’s law
At a constant pressure and mass, the temperature and volume of a gas vary directly. This is important in air MEDEVAC operations where air-filled devices, eg, endotracheal cuffs, air splints, and 
pneumatic anti-shock garments (PASGs), which are not rigid, will expand or contract as the ambient temperature increases or decreases.
DEFINITIONS
Tables 23-1 and 23-2 define common terms related 
to alternobaric (altitude, flight, and undersea) environmental challenges that may confront service 
members. First, basic and specific applied physiologic definitions are provided to assist the MMO 
in interpreting relevant literature and military 
policies. These definitions are followed by terms 
associated with common medical conditions and 
injuries in each environment. The MMO must have 
a clear understanding of all related terminology to 
interpret relevant literature and ultimately optimize warfighter performance through education, 
preparation, and anticipation of outcomes due to 
alternobarics.
(Table 23-1 continues)
327
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
Dalton’s law
The pressure of a gas mixture is equal to the sum of the partial pressures of the component gasses: 
P = P1 + P2 + P3 + Pn…
Related to human physiology, as the atmospheric pressure increases or decreases, the partial pressure of oxygen correspondingly increases or decreases even though the percentage remains constant. Clinically, oxygen toxicity can occur in diving operations or hypoxia at altitude.
Decompression 
tables
Printed cards or booklets that allow divers to determine a decompression schedule for a particular 
dive profile and breathing gas.
Divers Alert Network (DAN)
A nonprofit organization that conducts medical research on recreational scuba diving safety and 
assists divers in need.
Dive profile
The variation of depth with elapsed time during a dive, often depicted as a graph.
FSW
Feet of sea water; unit of pressure equal to 1/33 atm. Not a linear measure of depth.
Gauge pressure
Gauge pressure is zero-referenced against ambient air pressure, so it is equal to absolute pressure 
minus atmospheric pressure.
HBO
Hyperbaric oxygen 
Heliox
Mixtures of helium and oxygen for use as a breathing gas, used most commonly in deep sea commercial diving. The exact mixture of He and O2 varies with the type of operation.
Henry’s law
The amount of gas dissolved in a solution varies directly with the partial pressure of the gas over 
that solution. This relationship is the basis for decompression sickness, ie, taking a diver to altitude 
following a dive too quickly can cause dissolved nitrogen in the blood to form gas bubbles that are 
released from that solution into surrounding tissues.
High altitude
Altitude above sea level (ASL) can be broken down into the following categories based on physiologic impacts:
Low: sea level to 1,200 m/3,937 ft
Moderate: 1,200 m/3,937 ft to 2,400 m/7,874 ft
High: 2,400 m/7,874 ft to 4,000 m/13,123 ft
Very high: 4,000 m/13,123 ft to 5,500 m/18,046 ft
Extreme: higher than 5,500 m/18,046 ft
Hooka (airline 
diving)
Surface-supplied diving in which the breathing air is supplied to the diver by a simple hose. The 
diver usually breathes through a mouth-held demand valve.
NEDU
US Navy Experimental Diving Unit, located in Panama City, FL.
Nitrox
A mixture of nitrogen and oxygen for use as breathing gas, also known as enriched air. Usually has 
a higher oxygen percentage than air.
NOAA
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
Off-gassing
Diffusion of gas from tissue into blood, where it is transported to the lungs, where it diffuses into 
the lung gas and is eliminated by exhalation.
Oxygen fraction
Fraction by volume or pressure of the gas mixture made up by oxygen.
Partial pressure
The pressure that a component gas of a gas mixture would exert if it alone was present in the volume occupied by the gas mixture.
Rebreather 
Breathing apparatus used by special forces that recycles most of the exhaled gas, removing carbon 
dioxide and topping up oxygen before the gas is breathed again. 
Recompression 
chamber
A hyperbaric chamber used to treat divers suffering from certain diving disorders, such as DCS.
Trimix
Mixture of three gases, oxygen, nitrogen, and helium, for breathing. The gas fractions are usually 
specified during deep sea commercial diving.
UHMS
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society
Valsalva 
maneuver
Technique for equalizing the middle ear by moderately forceful attempted exhalation against a 
closed mouth and blocked nose.
Table 23-1 continued
328
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 23-2 
ALTERNOBARIC INJURY TERMINOLOGY
Term
Definition
AGE
Arterial gas embolism; blockage of an artery by a gas bubble. A possible consequence of lung 
overpressure injury.
Alternobaric vertigo
Dizziness caused by a difference of pressure between the middle ears.
AMS
Acute mountain sickness; a sickness and/or symptoms derived from climbing high altitudes, 
typically above 2,438 m/8,000 ft above sea level. 
Barotrauma 
(“squeeze”)
Injury caused by pressure difference, eg, increased pressure to the middle ear while the pressure 
of the auditory canal is at a lower pressure; the higher pressure causes tension and injuries to 
the tympanic membrane.
Bends (type I DCS)
A symptom of decompression sickness following exposure to a hypobaric pressure environment, 
when nitrogen bubble formation in the musculoskeletal tissues results in joint or limb pain. The 
joint pain may involve single or multiple joints and resolves with hyperbaric pressure exposure. 
Type I DCS presents as severe single or multiple joint pain (the “bends”) or pruritic rash (the 
“creeps”).
Chokes (type II DCS)
A symptom of decompression sickness manifested by shortness of breath, caused by a large 
number of venous gas bubbles in the lung capillaries, which interfere with gas exchange. Type 
II DCS is a potentially life-threatening condition involving cardio-respiratory compromise (the 
“chokes”) or neurological deficits.
DCI/DCS
Decompression illness/sickness; a condition arising from dissolved inert gases (eg, nitrogen) 
emerging from solution after a reduction in ambient pressure as bubbles in the tissues, organs, 
and blood vessels. In addition to types I and II, a type III DCS has been proposed combining 
AGE with DCS neurological symptoms.
HACE
High altitude cerebral edema; involves clinical symptoms and pathological injury to the brain 
during climbing to high altitude. The brain swells with fluid, with the clinical hallmark of 
ataxia.
HAPE
High altitude pulmonary edema, involves clinical symptoms and pathological injury to the lung 
during climbing to high altitude. It is a life-threatening, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema 
presenting with cough and dyspnea.
HPNS
High-pressure nervous syndrome, a neurologic and physiologic diving disorder that results 
when a diver descends below about 150 m/500 ft while breathing a helium–oxygen mixture.
Hypobaric hypoxia
Usually associated with increasing altitude above sea level and decreased barometric pressure; 
consequently, there is inadequate oxygen partial pressure to supply oxygen for body tissues, 
whether in quantity or molecular concentration. The result is altered biochemical reactions leading to functional impairment.
Nitrogen narcosis
Also known as narcs, inert gas narcosis, raptures of the deep, martini effect; a reversible alteration in consciousness that occurs while breathing gases containing nitrogen under elevated 
partial pressure, similar to alcohol intoxication or nitrous oxide inhalation. Can occur during 
shallow dives, but usually does not become noticeable until greater depths, below 30 m.
Oxygen toxicity
A condition resulting from the harmful effects of breathing molecular oxygen at elevated partial 
pressures.
Shallow water blackout
A loss of consciousness caused by cerebral hypoxia toward the end of a breath-hold dive in water 
typically shallower than 16 ft/5 m, when the swimmer does not necessarily experience an urgent 
need to breathe and has no other obvious medical condition that might have caused it.
VENTID-C
Acronym for oxygen toxicity symptoms: Vision-tunnel, Ears-ringing, Nausea, Twitching, Irritability, Dizziness, Convulsions.
329
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
MILITARY HISTORY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Altitude 
“A general who allows himself to be decisively defeated 
in an extended mountain position deserves to be courtmartialed.”
 
—Carl von Clausewitz1
Warfare at elevated altitudes has played a major 
role in recorded military history, as evidenced by the 
high-altitude engagements fought in Africa, Asia, and 
South America over the last few centuries. Victory or 
defeat usually went to the military units that were 
either well- or ill-prepared for altitude operations, respectively. Early in World War I, the Austro-Hungarian 
Empire recognized the strategic importance of the 
Carpathian Mountains (2,655 m/8,711 ft), but failed to 
appreciate the physiologic impacts of high altitude exposure on troops’ performance. General Franz Conrad 
von Hotzendorf planned and strategized for a short, 
surprise campaign to take the Carpathian Mountains 
from the Russians in a high altitude operation. Most 
of his troops were accustomed to operating at lower 
altitudes, whereas the Russian troops were accustomed 
to elevated climate and terrain. Curiously, Conrad 
made no plans for acclimating, equipping, or training 
his troops in mountain warfare. Three separate campaigns were fought and lost to the Russians during the 
winter of 1915, due in part to the lack of preparation 
for operations at elevated altitudes. 
More recently, US troops engaged in battles with 
Taliban fighters in the Afghanistan Hindu-Kush region 
(elevations above 3,000 m/9,842 ft). One notable battle 
occurred in the Shok Valley in Nuristan Province in 
April 2008. 2 Fifteen US Special Forces soldiers and 
airmen from the Operational Attachment-A (ODA) 
3336, 3rd Special Forces Group, and 100 Afghan commandos from the 1st Company, 201st Commando 
Battalion, Afghan National Army (ANA), fought 
approximately 200 Hezb-e-Islami Gulbuddin (HIG) 
forces. The following quote from one of the US ground 
force combat air controllers, Senior Airman Zachary 
J. Rhyner, highlights the environmental challenges 
facing warfighters and the MMOs who support them 
in high altitude terrain: 
Initial infiltration began [at altitude] . . . with snow on 
the ground, jagged rocks, a fast-moving river and a 
cliff. There was a 5-foot wall you had to pull yourself 
up. The ridgeline trail was out of control. 3
The US/ANA forces trained and acclimated in this 
environment for weeks in preparation for this mission, which lasted nearly 7 hours (Figure 23-1). They 
sustained four wounded US and two fatally injured 
ANA soldiers, versus 150 to 200 HIG fighters killed 
in action. 
These examples show that troops engaged in 
mountain operations must be physically acclimated 
to higher altitudes in addition to having the special 
training and equipment required for challenging terrain and weather. 4 Generally regarded as altitudes 
above 2,438 m/8,000 ft, the mountain environment 
poses many challenges to combat personnel: reduced 
barometric pressure resulting in decreased partial 
pressure of oxygen, frequently cold and unpredictable 
weather, intense solar and ultraviolet radiation, dry 
conditions that cause insensible fluid loss leading to 
dehydration, and lack of natural resources. 5 Undulating, narrow, and wooded terrain often makes resupply 
and transport of artillery difficult, if not impossible. 
Conventional rotary-wing air support above 3,962 
m/13,000 ft is not reliable due to the inability of rotor 
blades to create sufficient lift in the rarified air. 
The epidemiology of altitude-related injuries during 
combat operations, such as acute mountain sickness 
(AMS), high altitude cerebral edema (HACE), and 
high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE), is not well 
defined. Slow acclimation to the altitude is the best way 
to mitigate these injuries. Noncombat-related orthopedic injuries related to hazardous terrain and thermal 
injuries from environmental exposure are documented 
Figure 23-1. Members of Operational Detachment Alpha 
(ODA) 3336 of the 3rd Special Forces Group recon the remote 
Shok Valley of Afghanistan, where they fought an almost 
7-hour battle with insurgents in a remote mountainside village, 2008. US Army photo by SPC David N. Gunn. 
Reproduced from: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Zachary_Rhyner_and_Army_SF_in_Shok_Valley.jpg.
330
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
in anecdotal reports. The mechanisms for these injuries 
are understood and taken into account when planning 
operations in mountainous terrain. 6 
 
Aviation 
Advances in hot air balloon technology and operations were pioneered in the early 1800s. During this 
time frame, French physiologist Dr Claude Bernard led 
initial efforts to understand the physiologic changes 
occurring during high altitude exposure. One of his 
students, Dr Paul Bert, wrote a treatise titled “Barometric Pressure: Researches in Experimental Physiology,”7 
which contributed to the understanding of oxygen 
toxicity (termed the “Paul Bert effect”) with changes 
in barometric pressure. Bert went on to elucidate the 
root causes of altitude sickness, oxygen toxicity, and 
decompression illness. In France, hot air balloons were 
used extensively for ground observation and terrain 
analysis for military purposes throughout the 19th 
century, but limited maneuverability and technical 
challenges prohibited widespread use of these aircraft 
for combat operations. 
The tactical advantages of utilizing powered 
heavier-than-air aircraft in support of military ground 
operations were realized soon after Wilbur and Orville 
Wright designed, tested, and flew the original Wright 
Flyer in December 1903. The US Army initially funded 
the Wright brothers’ early studies at Hoffman Prairie, 
what is now Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. 8 In 1908, the Army accepted the technology 
designed by the Dayton natives, and began flight testing and training with the fledgling Army Air Corps. 
The same year, the US Army had it first aviation casualty, First Lieutenant Thomas Selfridge, who died in 
an air crash while on a test flight with Orville Wright 
at Ft Myer, Virginia (Figure 23-2). 
The following year lieutenants Frederic E. Humphrey and Frank P. Lahm completed their solo flights 
and became the first Army pilots. Subsequently, serious interest in aviation and human performance led 
to the Army’s formal recognition of aviation medicine. 
In 1911, a medical officer, Lieutenant John P. Kelly, 
became the Army’s first medical officer assigned to a 
flight school for aeromedical support. The following 
year, the US War Department formally adopted aviation medical standards. In 1914, Congress created an 
aviation section within the Army Signal Corps, and by 
1916, Army pilots and planes were used as scouting 
aircrafts, some 13 years after the Wright brothers’ first 
flight. The same year, Major Ralph Greene was the first 
medical officer placed on flying orders, becoming the 
first “flight surgeon.”
Following World War I, the War Department fully 
realized the potential of airpower when Brigadier 
General Billy Mitchell and his aircrew sank the German battleship Ostfriedland in July 1921. Since then, the 
airplane has been transformed from a simple propeller 
aircraft to a high-performance jet aircraft utilized for 
reconnaissance and bombing missions. Rotary-wing 
aircraft, or helicopters, also rapidly advanced, from 
simple, twin rotor-blade configurations, with limited 
speed and carrying capacity, to robust, turbo-powered 
multiple rotor-blade aircraft with airspeeds in the mid100-knot range and thousands of pounds of payload 
carriage. Tactically, helicopters today are used as utility aircraft for troop and cargo transport, aeromedical 
evacuation (MEDEVAC), observation, and, equipped 
with high-precision munitions, in attack configurations (Figure 23-3).
Undersea Operations
For more than 5,000 years, humans have been diving for the purposes of gathering food and materials, 
conducting salvage and covert military operations, 
and exploration, research, and development. 9 Initially, 
diving was confined to shallow waters and limited by 
the capacity of humans to breath-hold. While human 
biological shortcomings have not changed, research 
has increased the understanding of undersea conditions and led to technological advancements, enabling 
us to descend deeper, for prolonged periods of time. 
There remains much to learn about the ocean depths, 
and continued exploration, research, and development 
are essential for maintaining warfighter superiority in 
the undersea environment. Because humans are not 
Figure 23-2. The first aviation-related fatality, First Lieutenant Tom Selfridge at Ft Myer Field, Virginia, on September 
17, 1908. He and Orville Wright crashed in a Wright Flyer 
from approximately 150 ft above sea level. 
Photo courtesy of the National Museum of Health and Medicine; Otis Historical Archives 233. 05, Medical Illustration 
Service Library, Photo ID: MIS 63-720-15. 
331
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
aquatic mammals, an understanding of the forms of 
diving and associated equipment is a prerequisite to 
learning how the body responds to submersion and 
the complications that can arise during diving operations. There are three forms of diving: breath-hold 
(free-diving), surface-supplied, and self-contained 
underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA). 
Surface-supplied diving involves the delivery of 
air or gas mixtures from the surface to the submerged 
diver via a tube or hose. In fact, snorkeling is classified 
as surface-supplied diving despite its simplicity. In the 
16th century, with motivations to dive deeper, surface 
air was brought beneath the surface with diving bells. 
These were large, weighted, bell-shaped apparatuses 
with open bottoms that would trap air inside during submergence for the divers to breathe. In 1690, 
Edmund Halley enhanced diving bell technology by 
introducing an air recycling method to increase dive 
duration. 9,10 Well into the 20th century, diving bells 
were still used for undersea operations, particularly 
for construction and submarine rescue. 10
A similar technology was used in the 19th century to 
construct caissons, permanent underwater structures 
that recycle air delivered from the surface through 
high- capacity pumps. Caissons were used for excavating bridges and forming tunnels. A notable use of caissons was during the building of the Brooklyn Bridge, 
which led to the first identification of mass decompression sickness (DCS). Originally called caisson disease, 
the condition became evident when construction 
workers who felt normal during their subterranean/
subaquatic shifts developed sharp pains or dizziness 
when leaving the caisson upon returning to the surface. 
Many of the workers developed a “bent” appearance 
due to their joint pains and, possibly, muscle weakness. From these presentations, the disease became 
more commonly known as “the bends.” In 1878, Paul 
Bert determined the cause to be inert gas (eg, nitrogen) 
and pressure changes (from high to low). His research 
led to recommendations for slower decompression 
rates and the development of hyperbaric chambers 
for preventing and treating DCS. 9,11,12 
Although diving bells and caissons improved 
diving capabilities and construction efforts, divers’ 
maneuverability remained limited. This changed in 
1839 when Augustus Siebe, a German-born English 
engineer, developed the first practical diving dress, 
which consisted of a helmet, suit, and surface-supplied 
air hose, paving the way for the US Navy’s Mark V and 
Kirby Morgan 37 helmets.
SCUBA diving requires divers to carry their gas 
supply. Two types of SCUBA are used today: opencircuit and closed-circuit. In open-circuit SCUBA, the 
diver inhales gas from a tank and exhales gas into the 
atmosphere, whereas in closed-circuit SCUBA, the 
diver’s gas is recycled, eliminating exhaled bubbles 
and rendering the diver undetectable from the surface 
(Figure 23-4). The use of closed circuits began in the 
late 19th century; however, these systems were chalFigure 23-3. (a) Utility helicopter (UH-60) Black Hawk. A US 
Army UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter prepares to land during a medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) drill for a notionally 
injured soldier during a Table XII Live Fire Exercise, Novo 
Selo Training Area, Bulgaria, August 23, 2018. This exercise is 
in support of Atlantic Resolve, an enduring training exercise 
between NATO and US forces. US Army National Guard 
photo by Sgt. Jamar Marcel Pugh, 382nd Public Affairs 
Detachment/1st ABCT, 1st CD/Released. 
Reproduced from: https://www.dvidshub.net/
image/4671108/1-cav-table-xii-gunnery/. 
Figure 23-3. (b) Attack helicopter (AH-64) Apache. A US 
Army Apache helicopter with D Company, 1st Battalion, 3rd 
Aviation Regiment (Attack Reconnaissance) returns from a 
maintenance test flight August 17, 2018, at Katterbach Army 
Airfield in Ansbach, Germany. US Army photo by Charles 
Rosemond.
Reproduced from: https://www.dvidshub.net/
image/4660413/ah-64-apache-helicopter-maintenance-testflight.
332
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
Figure 23-4. Navy diver using “closed-circuit” rebreather 
device for undersea operations. The air tank is considerably 
smaller and more efficient for breathing air than conventional 
open-circuit air tanks and produces few air bubbles to the 
surface. The sailor, assigned to Explosive Ordnance Disposal 
Group One (EODGRU 1), during “mask up” of his MK-16 
rebreathers while conducting an underwater demolition 
training exercise off the coast of San Diego on May 25, 2017. 
Navy EOD is the world’s premier combat force for countering explosive hazards and enabling freedom of movement 
on land or at sea. US Navy Combat Camera Photo by Mass 
Communication Specialist 2nd Class Dan Rolston/Released.
Reproduced from: https://www.dvidshub.net/
image/3439691/eod-training-unit-underwater-demolition. 
lenging to use and had depth limitations. The depth 
problem was overcome in the early 20th century with 
the addition of compressed air tanks to the rig. 9,13,14 
With this advancement, Jacques-Yves Cousteau and 
Emile Gagnan developed the Aqua Lung in the 1940s, 
which included an open-circuit SCUBA system and a 
demand regulator that no longer required divers to 
control their airflow. This rig became widely popular 
due to its portability and functionality. 9 
In 1957, Captain George F. Bond, a Navy diving 
medical officer, theorized that there was a maximum 
amount of inert gas the body could store at a given 
depth (ie, saturation). His theory was corroborated 
through a series of diving experiments conducted 
during the 1960s. Based on the principles of gas 
equilibrium, the quantity of gas that dissolves in liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas 
(Henry’s law). Upon saturation, the inert gas burden 
cannot change because the gas gradient no longer exists. Because the inert gas burden is directly related 
to decompression obligation (the amount of time 
required to ascend from a given depth to minimize 
the risk of DCS), a saturated diver’s decompression 
obligation will not change. Thus, divers can work at a 
given depth for days, weeks, or even months without 
increasing their decompression time, significantly 
reducing time to task completion. For example, oil 
rig construction projects often span days to months. 
A 40-hour task to be completed at 200 ft of seawater 
(fsw) could be accomplished as a saturation dive or a 
series of non-saturation dives. In the former, the divers 
would work for 5 days at this depth and accrue 2 days 
of decompression obligation. In a series of non-saturation dives, even on gas mixtures designed to prolong 
bottom time and minimize decompression obligation, 
the divers would reach exceptional exposure limits 
after 45 minutes of diving and incur a decompression 
obligation of approximately 3 hours. At this rate, more 
than 40 days would be required to complete this job. 
Thus, saturation diving offers significant advantages 
when assignments are conducted over several days 
to months. 9
MILITARY APPLIED PHYSIOLOGY
Human performance is compromised at depth and 
at increased altitudes above sea level. Work efficiency 
may be reduced at all extremes, and this must be considered in any altitude, flight, or undersea mission. 
Understanding the basic principles of applied physiology that contribute to this performance decrement is 
critical for the MMO, who is frequently called upon for 
the proper interpretation of resources and guidelines 
on environmental stress. Knowledge of physiology 
enables the MMO to identify and modify those factors 
that can be mitigated or leveraged for success in the 
operational environment, and to promote prevention 
by educating individual service members as well as 
unit leaders.
Altitude
Physiologic alterations associated with altitude, 
secondary to progressive hypobaric hypoxia, generally begin with ascent to altitudes greater than 2,438 
m/8,000 ft above ground level. While the percentage 
of oxygen (O2) in one liter of air (21%) does not change 
at altitude, the partial pressure of O2 (Po2) declines 
with increasing altitude, according to Dalton’s law 
of partial pressures (Po2=PB × %O2). At sea level the 
pressure barometric (PB) is approximately 760 mm 
Hg, and the Po2 in atmospheric air is about 160 mm Hg 
(760 mm Hg × 0. 21). At 5,800 m, PB is approximately 
380 mm Hg, and the Po2 in atmospheric air is only 
80 mm Hg (380 mm Hg × 0. 21). In addition to the decreasing Po2 with altitude, the arterial oxyhemoglobin 
saturation (Sao2) begins to change dramatically at 
altitudes over 2,400 m, as one enters the steep decline 
333
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
on the hemoglobin O2-saturation curve, with resultant 
dramatic changes in performance (Figure 23-5).
The initial symptoms for the non-acclimatized individual include global headache, dizziness, nausea/
vomiting, and anorexia; dehydration and alcohol can 
intensify these effects. Rarely, these symptoms may 
progress to unconsciousness due to a sudden exposure 
to low oxygen partial pressure, although the exact 
mechanism is not well understood. The aforementioned symptoms are secondary to a reduced oxygen 
concentration, which stimulates a number of compensatory mechanisms. Principal among these processes 
is the hypoxic ventilatory response. The carotid body 
signals the central respiratory center to increase the 
ventilation rate, in addition to a moderate increase in 
blood pressure and heart rate. The decreased Pao2 also 
leads to transient pulmonary hypertension, increased 
fluid retention, and increased central blood volume. 
The hyperventilation in turn leads to a respiratory 
alkalosis, and a subsequent compensatory bicarbonate 
diuresis. Renal bicarbonate excretion, in combination 
with an increased 2,3-diphosphoglycerate production, 
promotes O2 unloading from hemoglobin. With continued ascent, symptoms of AMS become apparent, 
and limitations in physical stamina and concentration 
have the biggest impacts on performance. 
The MMO should educate service members and 
leadership about the potential operational impacts of 
conducting missions in the mountains: hypoxia’s role 
in tasks requiring concentration, psychomotor skills, 
and memory; degraded physical performance from 
fatigue and exertion; and the medical conditions resulting from acute hypoxic exposures in unacclimatized 
individuals. Taken together, these impacts on service 
members are often the first enemy they encounter at 
high altitude.
As altitude elevation increases without proper 
adaptation, cerebral hypoxia can lead to an increase 
of cerebral blood volume and increased intracranial 
pressure. Without corrective measures, the altered 
cerebral physiology can lead to HACE. The individual 
will develop a progressive neurologic deterioration 
manifested as altered mental status, ataxia, and stupor, 
progressively leading to coma and death. Similarly, 
pulmonary hypertension and fluid retention in the 
lungs can lead to HAPE. The clinical symptoms for 
HAPE are dry cough with interstitial edema, dyspnea 
on exertion, audible rales, observable cyanosis, and 
marked weakness. 
When HAPE or HACE develop, the individual must 
descend immediately to the lowest altitude possible on 
oxygen via a face mask. They should be transferred 
to the nearest hyperbaric chamber for treatment if 
symptoms do not improve. Operationally, descent to 
altitude may not be practical or safe (alternatives to 
descending altitude to increase hyperbaric exposure 
are discussed below). 
The effects of hypoxia on cognition and performance have been studied in military populations. 
Krykskow et al studied the relationship between 
changes in AMS severity and military task performance. 15 Non-acclimatized military personnel performed simple (disassemble and reassemble a rifle) 
or complex (rifle marksmanship) tasks at various 
altitudes between high (2,500 m/8,202 ft) and very 
high (4,300 m/14,107 ft) altitudes to determine where 
the threshold for performance decrements and clinical 
symptoms existed. 15 Simple tasks were not significantly affected at high or very high altitudes. However, 
significant reductions in marksmanship speed and 
target accuracy were observed at very high altitudes. 
The authors concluded that complex psychomotor 
performance was degraded at very high altitudes due 
to increased sleepiness and hypoxemia. Short periods 
of acclimatization (<30 h) did not improve these skills, 
suggesting that longer periods of acclimating to very 
high altitudes are necessary to maintain complex performance proficiency. 
The effects of high altitude (>3,700 m/12,139 ft) and 
exercise on marksmanship were studied by Tharion et 
al in the early 1990s. 16 The authors looked at several 
variables related to exercise and hypoxia and subsequent time to acclimate to altitude. Exercise with acute 
Figure 23-5. Scheme for categorizing altitude based on the 
relationship between altitude and physiological and function 
(work performance and altitude illness) outcomes. 
Reproduced from: US Department of the Army. Altitude Acclimatization and Illness Management. Washington, DC: DA; 
2010. Technical Bulletin, Medical, 505:12.
334
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
ascent to altitude significantly reduced marksmanship 
accuracy compared to sea level values. However, 
after a period of rest and acclimation to hypoxia, 
marksmanship accuracy and sighting time returned 
to baseline. Consistent with these findings, in 2014 
Moore and colleagues found both increasing altitude 
and exercise significantly decreased marksmanship 
(P < 0. 05). 17 They concluded that increasing altitude 
impaired marksmanship, with a threshold at 3,000 
to 4,000 m/9,842 to 13,123 ft. The decreased marksmanship was closely related to a decrease in arterial 
oxygen saturation and increased ventilation; the latter 
increased movement of the chest wall, which impacted 
the shooter’s ability to steady their aim.
Norris et al studied the development of high altitude 
headache (HAH) and AMS at moderate elevations in 
a military population during training exercises. 18 For 
the purpose of their study, the authors defined moderate altitude as 1,500 m/4,921 ft to 2,500 m/8,202 ft and 
high altitude as over 2,500 m/8,202 ft. Dehydration and 
recent arrival at altitude were significantly associated 
with the development of AMS. HAH was considered 
to be associated in part to decreased sleep at altitude. 
No reported cases of HACE or HAPE occurred in the 
study’s 202 marines and sailors. The study suggested 
that maintenance of hydration and adequate sleep 
may reduce the likelihood and severity of HAH and 
AMS occurrence. Additionally, the use of nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) seemed to reduce 
the symptoms in affected individuals. 
Aviation
Aviation poses physiologic stressors similar to those 
encountered in operations at altitude, related to the 
hypoxic and hypobaric environment. However, the 
challenge for the aircrew and the MMO is that flying 
is a dynamic activity with multiple stressors occurring 
rapidly and sometimes simultaneously, independent 
of the low pressure and oxygen environment. Aircrews 
are required to have recurrent hypobaric chamber 
training for hypoxia awareness, and aeromedical specialists must understand human performance during 
all phases of flight. MMOs must have a knowledge of 
how acceleration (G forces), pressure and gas volume 
changes related to Boyle’s law, thermal stress, vibration, noise, motion sickness, fatigue, and spatial disorientation all impact human performance during normal 
flight operations. The risk of sudden cabin depressurization and resultant hypoxia adds to the complexity 
of treating aviation-related conditions. Limitations on 
crew duty day, medication and nutritional supplement use, and waivers for medical conditions are all 
responsibilities of the aeromedical specialist. 
The occupational exposure to repetitive high-g accelerations and chronic vibration are particular areas of 
injury in which the flight surgeon must be well trained. 
For example, operational aviation research has noted 
a high rate of acute injury to muscle and ligament of 
the cervical spine due to G-force exposure in fighter 
pilots. 19 There is a higher incidence of cervical spine 
degeneration among pilots who have been exposed to 
G force versus those who have not. A meta analysis of 
eight studies also found an increase in degenerative 
spine diseases with repeated G-force exposure (P < 
0. 001). 19 Spinal trauma from repetitive low-frequency 
vibration exposure in rotary-wing aircraft has resulted 
in significant cervical and lumber spine injury in Army 
aviators. Aircraft type has been implicated as well in 
lumbar spine pain. Pilots of utility (UH) and attack 
(AH) helicopters, such as the UH-60 Black Hawk and 
AH-64 Apache, have an increased likelihood of low 
back pain compared to high-performance jet aircraft 
pilots or the general population. 20–22
In pressurized aircraft, the cabin “altitude” is a controlled environment. For jet aircraft, the cabin pressure, 
or equivalent effective cabin altitude, is created by air that 
is bled off the engine at the compressor stage, thermally 
adjusted, filtered, and humidified. A balance is maintained between a pressure altitude that limits structural 
fatigue on the aircraft fuselage and one that limits 
the likelihood of physiologic impacts on passengers. 
Aircraft operating above altitudes of 3,800 m/12,000 
ft mean sea level (MSL) require differential pressure 
regulation, which sets the cabin altitude between 2,100 
m/6,900 ft and 2,400 m/8,000 ft MSL. Oxygenation in 
healthy individuals at these altitudes is not an issue. 
However, sudden and rapid cabin depressurization 
results in tissue deoxygenation, and subsequent loss of 
consciousness, unless supplemental oxygen is readily 
available with simultaneous descent to lower altitude. 
Slow cabin leaks are more subtle and may progress 
without obvious notice. It is vitally important that the 
MMO and aircrew know their individual response to 
hypoxia and take corrective actions. Altitude chamber 
training is the standard for assessing hypoxic response, 
which varies by individual and includes tachycardia, 
loss of color vision, facial flushing, tachypnea, a sensation of “air hunger,” and difficulty concentrating, 
progressing to tunnel vision and loss of consciousness. 
Transitions during aircraft take-off and landing, 
when pressure and volume changes occur dynamically, pose the greatest threat to anatomic structures 
that contain trapped gas, such as the middle ear, facial 
sinuses, and lungs. MMOs must ensure that aircrew 
can effectively equalize the pressure in their middle 
ears (“clear their ears”) with a Valsalva maneuver to 
reduce the risk of ear and sinus barotrauma. Observ335
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
ing the tympanic membranes for movement while 
simultaneously having the individual blow against 
pinched nostrils is a direct confirmation of ability to 
equalize pressure. An ear or sinus block occurs when 
trapped gas volume cannot be equalized during 
pressure changes. The crewmember will complain of 
sudden intense pain and discomfort in the middle ear 
or sinuses that may impair the capacity to operate an 
aircraft safely. Severe cases can create marked barotrauma with rupture of the tympanic membrane and 
hearing loss. During most flight phases, descent from 
altitude will result in increased pressure and decreased 
gas volume. If the pressure cannot be equalized, the 
trapped gas will result in a relative negative pressure 
against the tympanic membrane or sinuses, causing 
severe pain or possible rupture. In the lungs, trapped 
air in the chest cavity from a small pneumothorax can 
expand at altitude, potentially compromising pulmonary function. 
Acceleration forces are a unique aspect of the operational aviation environment. Evasive maneuvers in 
high-performance jet aircraft, such as pitch up or steep 
banked turns, can subject aircrew to high acceleration 
forces, or “pulling Gs.” One G is the gravitational 
pull at 1 atmosphere at ground level. Since each level 
of G is measured on a logarithmic scale, a person 
experiencing 2 positive (+) Gs is likely to experience 2 
times their own body weight. Jet fighter aviators and 
astronauts often experience much higher levels of +G 
force. Depending on the vehicle launch parameters, 
an astronaut can experience up to 4 to 6 +Gs. Airmen 
in a high-performance aircraft or in an acrobatic plane 
can experience over 9 +Gs during an angular acceleration. In relative terms, this is like having nine or more 
people sitting on top of their head. The direction of the 
acceleration force vector on the body is another factor 
impacting physiology. A +Gz vector is in the head-totoe direction; a +Gx vector is front to back; and a +Gy 
load is experienced side to side. Of the three axial 
planes of acceleration loading, the +Gz force has the 
greatest performance impact on aircrew. 
Physiologically, these acceleration forces primarily 
affect the circulatory and pulmonary system of the 
aircrew. For example, a pilot who pulls back on the 
stick, causing a pitch-up maneuver, is exposed to a 
+Gz acceleration force. The result of +Gz loading on 
the heart is a reduction of effective cardiac output to 
the brain and movement of the column of oxygenated 
blood in the carotid arteries to the brain. The consequence when no oxygenated blood reaches the brain 
is either G-induced loss of consciousness (G-LOC) or 
almost loss of consciousness (A-LOC). With A-LOC, an 
airman cannot perceive color or cannot see anything at 
all. With G-LOC, blood no longer perfuses to the brain, 
and the airman loses consciousness. Likewise, in +Gz 
and +Gx, the pulmonary system is affected because the 
weight generated contracts the diaphragm, impairing 
the inspiratory phase, in addition to mechanical limitation in moving the chest wall anterior to posterior. A 
relative splinted breathing results, impairing effective 
respiration. 
Extreme noise, in excess of 120 to 140 dB, and lowfrequency vibration exposures are also common environmental threats to the airman. Prolonged exposure 
to loud noise can damage hair cells in the inner ears, 
potentially causing permanent hearing loss. Aircraft 
vibration, particularly in the 17- to 34-Hz range of 
rotary-wing aircraft, can cause air sickness, and aircrews or passengers may experience physiologic stress, 
discomfort, jaw pain, chest pain, back pain, and damage to the intervertebral discs. 
Likewise, spatial disorientation in flight is a significant aviation risk, due to the complex visual, vestibular 
(otolithic and semicircular canals), and proprioception 
effects on the brain, along with environmental factors. 
The inner ear otolith organs are the “gravitoreceptors,” 
which, along with the eyes and proprioceptive organs 
throughout the body, provide a position sense to the 
brain. This is what enables a person to know which direction is up, down, right, and left relative to the Earth. 
Working together, the eyes, otoliths, and proprioceptors provide accurate position sense, but can be fooled 
if any one or more of these sensory organs are not 
functioning properly or are receiving misinformation. 
For example, in a plane flying across the Atlantic Ocean 
at night with no moonlight, the pilot might not realize 
the plane is upside-down because the only visual input 
would be a dark visual field. Without a correct visual 
reference point, the brain, correctly sensing the pulling 
of gravity from the otoliths, has lost its “up-down” 
orientation. While the plane is actually descending at a 
rapid rate, the pilot may sense a paradoxical climb due 
to the sense of gravitational pull. This disorientation in 
space has resulted in countless aviation mishaps over 
the past century of flight. 
Lastly, motion sickness can be problematic for 
aircrew. During flight, motion sickness is caused by 
a sensory conflict or neural mismatch (ie, information 
sent to the brain from the eyes does not match information sent to the brain through the neurovestibular 
system), inducing a vagal response. The symptoms are 
manifested as a spectrum from stomach “awareness” 
to frank nausea and vomiting. 
Undersea Operations
For a diver to successfully inhale from a gas supply 
underwater, the gas must be pressurized to just above 
336
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
the ambient pressure. Inhalation of the pressurized 
gas results in an increased number of gas molecules 
in the lungs, and eventually, in the peripheral tissues. 
Gas enters the body at a constant pressure (P), temperature (T), and volume (V), factors that are highly 
influenced by variations in depth, body temperature, 
and environment. Before considering the physiologic 
effects of gases, it is important to understand how the 
physical properties of gases depend on these three 
interrelated factors. For example, the general gas law 
states that a change in any one of these factors will 
result in a change in at least one other, such that:
(P1V1)/T1 = (P2V2)/T2
Importantly, only one of the three variables can be 
unknown to predict the change, but if any of these 
variables remains constant, it is simple to predict how 
a specific gas will behave, as shown in the following 
gas laws.
Boyle’s law predicts how the pressure and volume of 
a gas change when temperature remains constant. The 
law states that at constant temperature, pressure and 
volume are inversely proportional, such that:
P1V1 = P2V2
Thus, if the pressure of a gas is increased, there will be 
a proportional decrease in its volume, and vice versa. 
A practical example of this phenomenon is an air-filled 
balloon. At rest, the pressure inside the balloon is in 
equilibrium with the surrounding atmosphere; thus, 
the volume of the balloon remains constant. If you 
were to squeeze the balloon (ie, decrease its volume) 
the pressure inside the balloon will increase. Eventually, if you decrease the balloon’s volume to the point 
where the pressure critically exceeds the ambient 
pressure, it will pop. 
This principle explains barotrauma and pulmonary 
over-inflation syndrome (POIS) in diving and high 
altitude operations, where air-filled cavities or organs, 
such as the middle ear or lungs, act like the balloon 
in the example. Barotrauma occurs in enclosed, gasfilled spaces with rigid walls and vascular/lymph-lined 
membranes that are exposed to changes in ambient 
pressure. The space must be enclosed so that the pressure within does not readily equilibrate with ambient 
pressure, creating a pressure gradient that shrinks or 
expands the enclosed space. POIS includes a diverse 
set of clinical presentations thought to occur due to 
over-pressurization of the lungs, which causes rapid 
gas bubble dispersal into normally gas-free areas. POIS 
develops on ascent as the air within the lungs expands 
according to Boyle’s law. If this expansion occurs too 
rapidly, gas may forcefully exit, and consequently 
rupture, the alveoli, enter the perivascular sheath, 
and continue to the neck, mediastinum, and/or the 
vasculature, with subsequent arterialization. This can 
result in four presentations: pneumomediastinum (and 
pneumopericardium), subcutaneous emphysema, 
pneumothorax, and air gas embolism. 23,24
Boyle’s law explains the relationship between pressure and volume when temperature is constant; however, temperature fluctuations can significantly alter a 
gas’s pressure and volume. Charles’s and Gay-Lussac’s 
laws predict how the pressure or volume of a gas reacts when temperature changes. Charles’s law states 
that when pressure remains constant, a gas’s volume 
is directly proportional to its temperature, such that:
V1/T1 = V2/T2
Thus, if the temperature of a gas increases, so too does 
its volume, and vice versa. Similarly, Gay-Lussac’s 
law states that when volume remains constant, a gas’s 
pressure is directly proportional to its temperature, 
such that:
P1/T1 = P2/T2
Thus, if the temperature of a constant volume of gas 
within a fixed container increases, so too will its pressure, and vice versa. 
Air composition is approximately 21% O2, 78% 
nitrogen (N2), 0. 03% carbon dioxide (CO2), and 1% 
argon and other trace gases. The percentages in Earth’s 
atmosphere are independent of the ambient pressure; 
that is, increases or decreases in pressure result in a 
higher or lower density of composite molecules respectively, with no change in percentages. One method for 
quantifying the amount of a particular gas with respect 
to its effects on the body is to calculate its partial pressure. As previously discussed in the section on altitude 
physiology, Dalton’s law states that the total pressure 
exerted by a gas mixture is the sum of the partial pressures exerted by each gas within the mixture. Thus, the 
partial pressure of a gas is the product of the ambient 
pressure of the gas mixture and the fractional concentration (percentage/100) of the gas within that mixture.
Atmospheric gases can impact pathophysiologic 
states if their partial pressure varies greatly or changes 
rapidly, affecting operator safety and mission success. 
Thus, an understanding of a gas’s partial pressures and 
their corresponding symptoms becomes critical when 
determining gas mixtures to be used for missions of 
different depths and lengths. In diving, US military 
convention is to express pressure in atmospheres 
absolute (ata) or fsw (Table 23-3). At sea level, atmospheric or ambient pressure is equal to 1 ata, which 
is the equivalent of 14. 7 pounds per square inch (psi) 
or 760 mm Hg (ie, at sea level, we are exposed to the 
weight of one atmosphere of gas pressing upon us). 
337
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
TABLE 23-3
EFFECTS OF DEPTH ON VOLUME, PRESSURE, AND GAS PARTIAL PRESSURE*
Relative Lung 
Volume
Depth, 
fsw (m)
Absolute Pressure, 
ata (psi)
Po2, 
ata (% air)
Pn2, 
ata (% air)
1
0
1 (14. 7)
0. 21 (21)
0. 78 (78)
0. 5
33 (10)
2 (29. 4)
0. 42 (21)
1. 56 (78)
0. 33
66 (20)
3 (44. 1)
0. 63 (21)
2. 34 (78)
0. 25
99 (30)
4 (58. 8)
0. 84 (21)
3. 12 (78)
*Note that as absolute pressure increases, the partial pressure of a specific gas increases while its percentage within 
the mixture does not.
Air, however, is less dense (1. 275 kg/m3) than sea water 
(1,028 kg/m3) and fresh water (1,000 kg/m3), and the 
equivalent to 1 ata of gas is added for every 33 fsw and 
34 ft of fresh water. For example, when descending to 
33 fsw, a diver will be exposed to a total pressure of 2 
ata (1 ata of air + 1 ata of sea water); at 66 fsw the total 
pressure will equal 3 ata; and so on. The following 
examples, in addition to Table 23-3, provide an understanding of how gas partial pressures are affected by 
depth and gas mixture composition:
Example 1. What is the partial pressure of O2 (Po2) and 
N2 (Pn2) in air at sea level?
Po2 = total pressure of air at sea level (1 ata) 
× fractional concentration of O2 (0. 21) = 0. 21 ata
Pn2 = total pressure of air at sea level (1 ata) 
× fractional concentration of N2 (0. 78) = 0. 78 ata
Example 2. What are the Po2 and Pn2 in a 65% O2, 35% 
N2 breathing mixture at 2 ata (33 fsw)?
Po2 = total pressure (2 ata) 
× fractional concentration of O2 (0. 65) = 1. 3 ata
Pn2 = total pressure (2 ata) 
× fractional concentration of N2 (0. 35) = 0. 7 ata
Example 3. What are the Po2 and Pn2 in air at 100 fsw? 
(Hint: don’t forget to include the Earth’s atmosphere.)
Po2 = total pressure at 100 fsw [(100 + 33)/33)] 
× 0. 21 = 4 ata × 0. 21 = 0. 84 ata
Pn2 = total pressure at 100 fsw [(100 + 33)/33)] 
× 0. 78 = 4 ata × 0. 78 = 3. 12 ata
Gases enter the body via the lungs and interface with 
the bloodstream at the alveoli. Here, gases dissolve 
into and out of the blood following their respective 
concentration gradients. Under normal physiologic 
conditions at sea level, O2 in the alveoli rapidly diffuses 
into capillary beds and moves into pulmonary arterial 
blood for transport back to the heart and throughout 
the body. Conversely, CO2 produced in tissues from 
oxidative phosphorylation rapidly diffuses into the 
bloodstream and is returned to the lungs, where it 
is exhaled. Importantly, while the body can adapt to 
chronic alterations in Po2 and Pco2, acute changes in 
barometric pressure and/or breathing mixtures can 
result in extreme symptomology. For example, O2 can 
be toxic to the central nervous system (eg, causing seizures) or lungs (eg, pulmonary edema) if administered 
at an elevated Po2 for an extended period. 
While O2 and CO2 are examples of metabolically 
active gases that are constantly being exchanged and 
transported, gases such as N2 and helium are believed 
to be chemically and metabolically inert, meaning that 
gas inhaled is identical to the gas exhaled, because the 
body does not require its use for metabolism. Inert 
gases are also transported from the atmosphere into the 
lungs, by the same pathways, and subsequently into 
the peripheral tissues. For example, when breathing N2 
at hyperbaric pressures, the Pn2 in the lungs increases 
(per Dalton’s law). Accordingly, tissue Pn2 increases 
in accordance with Henry’s law, which states that the 
solubility of a gas is directly proportional to its partial 
pressure, written as P=kC, where P, k, and C are the 
pressure, Henry’s law constant, and concentration, 
respectively, of a given gas. Increasing lung Pn2 will, 
therefore, result in elevated tissue Pn2, which will remain dissolved until pressure is decreased. Excessive 
tissue N2 is not problematic as long as adequate time 
is allowed for the N2 to dissolve out of tissues and be 
exhaled by the lungs. 
Dive tables have been developed to allow for proper 
inert gas washout based on depth, time at depth, and 
breathing mixture to prevent inert gas complications 
such as DCS. 9 DCS can result from any dive that includes breathing an increased partial pressure of inert 
gases, specifically gases with higher lipid solubility 
such as N2. Because exposure to increased pressure 
increases N2 dissolved in peripheral tissues, equilibra338
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
tion will occur with respect to the Pn2 in the lungs. In 
general, risk of DCS is lower when depth, dive duration, and N2 load are decreased. When these factors 
are increased, a diver incurs a larger decompression 
obligation, resulting in a longer period of staged ascent 
or surface decompression to avoid DCS. If ascent occurs 
too quickly, N2 will supersaturate and form expanding 
bubbles (Boyle’s law) that can cause joint pain, paralysis, and increased risk of venous and arterial emboli. 
Immersion in water can significantly alter normal 
human physiology. With increasing depth, the body 
is subjected to greater hydrostatic pressure, which is 
the force exerted by the surrounding water. As hydrostatic pressure increases with depth, so too will 
the partial pressures of breathing gases. Importantly, 
organs and air-filled cavities equilibrate at different 
rates, inducing pressure differentials that result in 
the displacement of gases and fluids throughout the 
body. Upon immersion, the increased hydrostatic 
pressure also results in compression of blood vessels, 
effectively decreasing venous capacity and increasing 
venous return to the heart. 25 The resulting increase in 
cardiac volume causes an increase in end-diastolic 
volume, which increases stroke volume and cardiac 
output. These changes result in an increase in pulse 
pressure, stimulation of atrial stretch receptors, release 
of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), and activation 
of the arterial baroreflex. ANP is a cardiac hormone 
that acts on the kidneys to reduce the activity of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone reflex and increase 
the glomerular filtration rate. The net effects are an 
increase in sodium and fluid excretion, which reduces 
blood volume and pressure, and a pressure-dependent 
baroreflex-mediated increase in parasympathetic tone, 
which decreases heart rate and stimulates vasodilation. 
Diving also affects ventilation. Increased hydrostatic 
pressure on the thorax, combined with an increase in 
airway resistance from breathing denser gas, results 
in an increased work of breathing that can lead to 
respiratory muscle fatigue and hypercapnia. 2 Indeed, 
hypercapnia is common in divers and is exacerbated 
by exercise, hyperoxia-induced hypoventilation, and 
rebreathing of CO2 within the excess dead space of a 
diver’s breathing apparatus. 
HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES FOR EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS
The MMO is expected to have scientific background 
in the physiology of extreme environments, as well as 
the medical knowledge to provide recommendations 
for prevention of environmental injuries, to treat such 
injuries, and to assist in return-to-duty determinations when restriction from activity or deployment is 
essential. Above all, the best treatment strategy for all 
potential environmental injuries and illness is primary 
prevention. Primary prevention is the cornerstone of 
optimizing human performance in extreme environments. This section discusses military-relevant human 
performance optimization strategies the MMO should 
leverage to assist in preventing injury and optimizing 
human performance. Table 23-4 integrates evidencebased strategies, including the targeted risk factor/
challenge, to optimize service members’ performance 
in environmental extremes.
Altitude 
The MMO is a critical asset to commanders for mitigating the risk of AMS and optimizing performance at 
altitude. The foremost recommendation is to leverage 
acclimatization through appropriate staging. Staging 
involves temporary residence at a moderate altitude 
prior to moving to a higher altitude. Figure 23-6 depicts 
the optimal duration at a given altitude prior to further 
ascent to optimize acclimatization. Acclimatization 
should start at elevations below 10,000 ft and proceed 
at stages high enough to acclimatize but low enough 
to avoid altitude illness. Military personnel should 
not ascend above 2,400 m/7,870 ft during their first 
24 hours of ascent if not already acclimatized. Above 
that point, they should avoid ascending more than 300 
m/1,000 ft per day. Plan staging and rest days at each 
Figure 23-6. Recommended staging altitude and duration 
combinations to produce effective altitude acclimatization 
in previously unacclimatized soldiers. 
Reproduced from: US Department of the Army. Altitude Acclimatization and Illness Management. Washington, DC: DA; 
2010. Technical Bulletin, Medical, 505:25.
339
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
TABLE 23-4
HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES TO MITIGATE RISK FACTORS IN ALTERNOBARIC ENVIRONMENTS
Environment
Performance Risk 
Factor or Challenge
HPO Strategy
Undersea
AGE/DCI/DCS
Avoid breath holding on ascent; adherence to Dive Table descent–ascent 
rates and gas mix; transfer to hyperbaric chamber immediately for definitive 
treatment.
Undersea
Oxygen toxicity
Proper gas mix and adherence to maximal depth and bottom time guidance.
Undersea
Barotrauma
Adherence to Dive Table descent–ascent rates and proper breathing technique.
Altitude
AMS
Acclimatization; work/rest/hydration guidance; prescription medications; slow 
ascent; supplemental oxygen; overnight rest at a lower altitude.
Altitude
HACE/HAPE
Acclimatization; work/rest/hydration guidance; prescription medications; slow 
ascent; supplemental oxygen; overnight rest at a lower altitude. If present: immediate descent with subsequent oxygen chamber treatment.
Aviation
Grey-out, black-out, 
G-LOC
Maintain optimal health; work/rest/hydration/strengthening or resistance exercise and guidance; avoid diving 24 h prior; avoid donating blood 72 h prior; 
participate in preflight flight simulation or centrifuge training and use it to 
anticipate flight maneuvers that would cause G-LOC.
Aviation
Motion sickness
Work/rest/hydration guidance; participate in preflight flight simulation or 
centrifuge training and use it to anticipate flight maneuvers; do not fly with 
empty stomach and no greasy food consumption prior; frequent simulation 
training with or without 3-D rotational simulation chair; cool/cold air temperature may help during flight.
Aviation
Spatial disorientation
Work/rest/hydration guidance; good visual acuity; frequent simulation training.
Aviation
Barotrauma
Maintain optimal health; Valsalva maneuver during flight; avoid flying when 
sick; medication such as oral or topical decongestants for acute symptoms.
Aviation
Acute decompression
Immediate descent; oxygen supplementation; transfer to hyperbaric chamber 
immediately for definitive treatment.
Aviation
Cold/heat/sound/ 
vibration/radiation
Work/rest/hydration guidance; proper personal protective equipment and 
environmental design.
Aviation
Circadian dysynchrony
Good sleep hygiene with preplanned sleep schedules; benzodiazepine or 
non-benzodiazepine hypnotics (use only in specific instances, especially in 
military operation contingency).
AGE: arterial gas embolism
DCS: decompression sickness
HAPE: high altitude pulmonary edema
AMS: acute mountain sickness
G-LOC: G-induced loss of consciousness
HPO: human performance optimization
DCI: decompression illness
HACE: high altitude cerebral edema
LOC: loss of consciousness
elevation, adding an additional rest day with each 
stage. The MMO should also recommend work/rest 
cycles and adequate hydration. Warfighters should 
have good physical strength and optimize their individual aerobic capacity (V̇ o2max) based on body size 
and gender. Finally, service members should also understand strategies to mitigate heat and cold stressors 
often encountered in altitude operations.
Another preventive measure is intermittent hypoxic 
exposure (IHE)—repeatedly exposing an individual to 
altitude for a short period of time. A protocol-driven 
exposure, IHE can be done using terrestrial altitude, 
flight in an unpressurized aircraft, flight in a pressurized aircraft with high cabin altitudes, or a normobaric 
hypoxic device. When using a normobaric hypoxic 
device, a face mask or hood alone is not sufficient; an 
oxygen delivery system with the capability of supplying a lower than ambient oxygen concentration is 
also required. Table 23-5 lists recommended exposure 
procedures. 
Supplemental medication may also help climbers 
avoid AMS. These medications include acetazolamide to promote bicarbonate diuresis, furosemide 
to promote diuresis and decrease edema, and aspirin 
340
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 23-5
RECOMMENDED INTERMITTENT 
HYPOXIC EXPOSURE PROCEDURES TO 
INDUCE ALTITUDE ACCLIMATIZATION IN 
PERSONNEL BASED AT LOW ALTITUDE*
Session 
Duration 
(h)
Days
Frequency
Altitude 
(m)
Activity
3–4
7–14
daily
4,000–
4,500
Rest, may include exercise 
at 50%–60% 
maximum 
heart rate
>7
>5
daily
2,500–
4,000
Rest, sleep, 
may include 
exercise at 
50%–60% 
maximum 
heart rate
*To avoid sleep disturbances, the first 1–2 nights should not exceed 
2,500 m altitude.
and acetaminophen for headaches (NSAIDs may be 
used sparingly but are not highly recommended due 
to increased risk of bleeding and fluid retention). 
Corticosteroids such as dexamethasone may also be 
used. Prochlorperazine may be used for nausea or 
vomiting. Also, carbohydrate and caffeine intake just 
prior to physical activity may help optimize physical 
performance at altitude. Other supplements have not 
been demonstrated to help prevent AMS. Alcohol and 
sedative hypnotics should be avoided due to depressive effects on respiration. Technical Bulletin 505, Altitude Acclimatization and Illness Management, contains 
a detailed review of medications for the prevention 
and treatment of AMS. 6 
If adequate time for acclimation has not occurred, 
supplemental oxygen is a good strategy for operations above 3,048 m/10,000 ft above sea level (ASL). 
However, slow, progressive ascent is the only reliable 
preventive measure to reduce the risk of developing 
HACE or HAPE. Table 23-6 details the field treatment 
and prevention of HACE. Above 5,486 m/18,000 ft ASL, 
even adequate rest/ascent schedules do not prevent 
these life-threatening conditions. If a climber develops HACE or HAPE, apply a tight-fitting mask with 
oxygen supplementation and have the person descend 
immediately. Warfighters can also use a mobile monochamber hyperbaric treatment chamber, such as a 
Gamow bag, for emergencies; however, definitive care 
at the nearest oxygen chamber facility is also required. 
Additional information can be found at Uniformed 
Services University’s Human Performance Resource 
Center (see resources).
Aviation
The mitigation strategies stated in Chapter 22, Environmental Extremes: Heat and Cold, also apply to 
personnel who will be flying or climbing. Adherence 
to good rest and sleep cycles and adequate hydration 
are essential. Additionally, MMOs can recommend 
that aviators perform cardiovascular and muscle 
strengthening/resistance training, which can improve 
performance in high-altitude environments up to 10%, 
especially during anti-G straining maneuvers. Prior 
to flight operations, aircrew members should discuss 
operation risk management and appropriate corrective 
actions in case of emergency. All aircrew, including the 
MMO, should be engaged in pre-flight planning and 
safety briefings. Also, the MMO should inspect the 
aircraft prior to flight for structural or environmental 
issues that might pose a safety or operational risk during flight. For example, there should be seat cushions 
to damp vibration, ear protection, and form-fitted 
flying helmets. 
An MMO serving as a local flight surgeon or 
aviation physician assistant will assess all air crewmembers’ fitness for duty prior to flight to rule out 
any illness or injury that might impair their ability to 
perform aviation duties. All personnel flying in high 
performance aircraft must receive proper training for 
anti-G maneuvers, and the MMO must be familiar with 
these concepts. Centrifuge training is particularly effective at improving individual G-tolerance, and training 
in a 3-D rotational simulation chair may help flyers to 
adjust to air sickness. The MMO will also educate all 
aircrew on the following points: 
 
• avoid flying within 24 hours after diving to 
prevent DCS risk; 
 
• avoid donating blood 72 hours before flying; 
 
• never fly on an empty stomach or after eating 
a greasy meal; 
 
• avoid flying when ill unless appropriate medical personnel are present;
 
• use personal protective equipment properly; 
and
 
• perform Valsalva maneuvers to decrease the 
chance of barotrauma, vibration, and noise 
injuries.
Additionally, reducing cabin temperature may 
help ease motion sickness symptoms. Anti-nausea 
medications such as a scopolamine patch or meclizine 
341
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
TABLE 23-6
FIELD TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF HIGH ALTITUDE PULMONARY EDEMA
Severity of HAPE
Treatment
Prevention
Mild
• Dyspnea on moderate exertion; 
may be able to perform light activity
• Heartbeat per min: <110
• Breaths per min: <20
1. Descend 500–1,000 m by passive 
means.
2. Stop ascent, bed rest and acclimatize at the same altitude.
3. Administer moderate flow oxygen 
at 2–4 L/min for 4–6 h. Maintain 
oxygen saturation at >90%.
4. Use hyperbaric bag treatment (2 psi 
for 4 h).
5. Nifedipine (10 mg initially followed by 30 mg every 12 to 24 h).
6. Use a combination of therapies 1–5.
7. Consider acetazolamide (125–250 
mg twice daily).
1. Staged and graded ascent.
2. Avoid overexertion.
3. Avoid cold exposure.
4. Avoid rapid ascent >2,500 m.
5. Administer nifedipine (30 mg every 
24 h) 1 day prior to ascent and for 3 
days after ascent.
6. Consider tadalafil (10 mg twice 
daily), sildenafil (50 mg every 8 h), 
and salmeterol (125 µg twice daily).
Moderate
• Symptoms of dyspnea, weakness, 
fatigue with mild exertion; cannot 
perform light activity; headache 
with cough, dyspnea at rest
• Heartbeats per min: 110–120
• Breaths per min: 20–30
1. Descend immediately (500–1,000 
m) until symptoms resolve.
2. If descent is impossible, treat the 
same as mild HAPE except supplemental oxygen should be 4–6 L/
min for 4–6 h.
1. Same as for mild HAPE.
2. Treat mild HAPE early to avoid 
progression to moderate HAPE.
Severe
• Clouded consciousness, stupor or 
coma
• Severe dyspnea, headache, weakness, nausea at rest
• Loose, recurrent, productive cough
• Wheezy, difficult respirations; obvious cyanosis
• Heartbeats per min: >120
• Breaths per min: >30
1. Descend immediately (500– 1,000 
m) until symptoms resolve. 
2. If descent impossible—
• Treat the same as moderate 
HAPE.
• Monitor for signs of HACE.
1. Same as for moderate HAPE.
2. Treat mild and moderate HAPE 
early to avoid progression to severe 
HAPE.
HACE: high altitude cerebral edema
HAPE: high altitude pulmonary edema
hydrochloride should only be used by non-pilot crew 
because of their tendency to cause drowsiness. Finally, 
if problems persist or acute decompression ensues, 
flyers should descend as soon as possible, preferably 
with the use of supplemental oxygen.
Special consideration must be taken for rotary-wing 
aircrew operating in hot weather (over 42°C/108°F). 
Insensible fluid loss in hot, dry environments can rapidly lead to dehydration if fluids are not adequately 
replaced. Dehydration is complicated by the use of 
stimulant supplements by aircrew, which is a common 
practice in combat settings. The fluid recommendations discussed earlier for ground units do not take 
into account the inability for aircrews to take work/
rest cycles during flight, and aerial transportation or 
combat sorties often last up to 6 hours. A proposed 
fluid replacement strategy for aircrews operating in 
hot weather environments is detailed in Table 23-7. 26
Undersea Operations
Diving is generally safe; however, the military continues to extend mission parameters with deeper and 
longer descents, increasing the risk of diving-related 
342
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
TABLE 23-7
PROPOSED FLUID MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE 
FOR ROTARY-WING AVIATION CREWS IN HOT 
WEATHER ENVIRONMENTS 
Temperature
Recommended Fluid Replacement 
(mL/h) 
42°–48°C
500–750 mL H2O
>48°C
750–1,000 mL H2O + 500 mL commercial 
electrolyte solution
injuries. These risks can be reduced by screening divers, training MMOs, maintaining safe diving practices, 
and continuing diving-related medical research. Diving medical experts have an obligation to regularly 
screen current and future military divers for medical 
conditions that may be exacerbated by the strenuous 
hyperbaric environment. Chapter 15 of the Navy’s 
Manual of the Medical Department outlines screening criteria and recommendations. 27 There are five principal 
questions to ask when screening a (potential) diver: (1) 
Can this person perform strenuous activity? (2) Does 
this person have any condition that is not controlled 
and may increase his or her risk of drowning? (3) Does 
this person have any condition that the diving environment may exacerbate? (4) Does this person have any 
abnormalities on neurologic examination? (5) Can this 
person equalize ear pressure? 
All divers must propel themselves through the 
water, requiring considerable physical strength and, 
at times, endurance. Anyone who is unable to perform 
strenuous aerobic activity on land, particularly because 
of cardiac ischemia, will be put at extreme risk by diving. The Navy administers a diving physical screening 
test to all diving candidates to ensure an adequate level 
of physical fitness. For civilians or qualified military 
divers who are being rescreened, providers should 
assess the patient’s regular physical activity and identify the metabolic equivalent (MET) corresponding to 
that activity. Basic diving requires a 6-MET tolerance, 
though difficult sea states or strenuous underwater 
jobs may require significantly more (10–13 METs). 28 If 
civilian divers are only able to perform at 6 to 9 METs, 
the provider should discuss the risks associated with 
diving, recommend a land-based exercise regimen prior 
to diving, and consider referral to a diving medical 
expert for further evaluation. All military divers should 
be able to perform activities of at least 10 to 13 METs.
Treatable medical conditions on land are potentially 
life-threatening underwater because of secondary 
drowning. Prominent examples are myocardial infarctions and seizures. Evaluating a patient’s aerobic 
capacity as discussed above can mitigate the risk for 
myocardial infarction. Patients with uncontrolled seizures should not dive. A patient with well-controlled 
seizures should discuss diving risks with a provider 
to make an informed decision. Experts recommend 
being seizure free for at least 4 years prior to considering diving. 29 If a patient decides to dive, he or she 
should remain in shallow water and always dive with 
a buddy who is aware of the seizure disorder and 
capable of executing an emergency action plan. Deep 
dives should be avoided because increased Po2 will 
increase the risk for seizure activity.
A primary concern with pulmonary pathology is 
its potential exacerbation in the diving environment. 
Two examples include asthma and spontaneous pneumothorax. Cold water, cold compressed gas, and high 
Po2 may increase airway reactivity and the risk for an 
asthma exacerbation. There have also been reports of 
allergens in air tanks causing exacerbations. Finally, 
some case reports suggest that people with asthma 
may have a higher rate of diving-related complications 
such as POIS and DCS, which has led some experts 
to label asthma as an absolute contraindication to 
diving. 27,30 Similarly, the risk of POIS is elevated in 
patients with a history of spontaneous pneumothorax, causing many experts to consider it an absolute 
contraindication to diving as well. At least one case 
report documents a series of successful dives with a 
chronic pneumothorax, but no evidence exists for successful diving after pleurodesis. 31 However, surgical 
interventions such as mechanical pleurodesis have 
been successful in treating aviation personnel with 
spontaneous pneumothoraces and returning them to 
duty. 32 Patients with pulmonary pathologies should 
be referred to diving medical experts to make an 
informed decision about diving based on known and 
theoretical risks.
Two parts of the screening process—the patient’s 
neurologic status and their ability to equalize pressure 
in the ears—should be documented both at the initial 
examination and prior to every dive. The screening 
process should document a complete neurologic examination to establish a patient’s baseline. This will 
be critical in the event of a possible diving-related 
neurologic injury, such as arterial gas embolism and 
DCS. Prior to every dive, divers should report any 
neurologic symptoms—numbness, tingling, or joint 
pain—that may conflate a diagnosis of arterial gas 
embolism or DCS. At the time of screening, all divers 
should demonstrate tympanic membrane mobility 
by equalizing ear pressure under direct observation. Divers who have difficulty with equalization 
may benefit from video-assisted otoscopy, which 
343
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
is training aimed at improving and individualizing 
equalization techniques. Any presence of an upper 
respiratory tract infection or allergies may prevent 
adequate equalization; thus, diving should be temporarily avoided.
Monitoring human performance biometrics is 
essential to proper preparation and ensuring performance optimization in the diver, submariner, and 
undersea personnel. Aerobic conditioning measures 
are critical (for more detailed information, see the Human Performance Resource Center below). Aside from 
personnel preparation, including mission knowledge 
and strategies, physical preparation for the undersea 
environment is a must. Water temperatures introduce 
limiting human performance issues that can only be 
addressed prior to mission initiation. Cold waters necessitate proper insulation to optimize performance. 
Warmer waters may call for active cooling measures 
to ensure even minimal work performance and mission accomplishment. Monitoring of work/rest cycles 
is equally important for undersea operations. The 
MMO must always have a strategic plan in place for 
responding to mission failures, including identification of compression chamber facilities, access to active 
cooling and warming, and responses to typical medical 
issues resulting from military operations. 
ONLINE RESOURCES FOR ALTERNOBARIC ENVIRONMENTS
 
• Medical Surveillance Monthly Report (https://
www.afhsc.mil/Search/SearchMSMR): provides evidence-based estimates of the incidence, distribution, impact, and trends of 
illnesses in service members and associated 
populations. Annual reports are published on 
topics such as environmental illnesses, which 
allow for comparisons of prior year data and 
assessment of preventive strategies. 
 
• Divers Alert Network (http://www.diversalertnetwork.org/): promotes diver safety by 
providing medical information, educational 
opportunities, and safety resources for divers. 
 
• Naval Sea Systems Command (http://
www.supsalv.org/00c3_publications.
asp?destPage=00c3): provides diving manuals and instructions. 
 
• Duke University Center for Hyperbaric Medicine and Environmental Physiology (https://
medicine.duke.edu/divisions/pulmonaryallergy-and-critical-care-medicine/about/
division-programs/hyperbaric-medicine): 
serves the US armed forces as well as the Environmental Protection Agency and National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
 
• Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory (http://www.med.navy.mil/sites/nsmrl/
Pages/default.aspx): provides information on 
research in the undersea environment with an 
overall mission to protect health and enhance 
performance of service members. 
 
• Navy Experimental Dive Unit (http://www.
supsalv.org/nedu/nedu.htm): conducts research and development to test and evaluate 
diving, hyperbaric, and other life-support 
systems necessary for the diver. 
 
• Professional Association of Diving Instructors Scuba Diving Society (https://www.
padi.com/Scuba-Diving/scuba-community/
padi-diving-society): provides courses and 
information about gear and other scuba topics. 
 
• Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine Society 
(https://www.uhms.org/): primary source of 
scientific information for diving and hyperbaric medicine physiology worldwide. 
 
• Uniformed Services University’s Human 
Performance Resource Center (https://www.
hprc-online.org/page/environment/altitude): 
provides information on performing well at 
high altitudes.
SUMMARY
This chapter has introduced the MMO to the basics of 
optimizing service member performance in alternobaric 
settings. It has discussed the historical relevance of the 
environment to success in military operations, the basic 
applied physiology relevant to understanding the warfighter in the environment, and finally, evidence-based 
strategies demonstrated to preserve performance in 
environmental extremes. MMOs must often operate in 
unique settings with limited resources, where urgency 
and proper planning can be the difference between 
success and failure on the battlefield. It is important to 
remember that the MMO serves not only to treat the 
wounded, but also to optimize performance and ultimately to strengthen the commander’s hand for success. 
344
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
REFERENCES
 
1. von Clausewitz C. On War. Vol 2. London, England: Routledge and Kegan Paul; 1968: 263.
 
2. Jennings PR. ODA 3336 in the Shok Valley: danger close. Defense Media Network. http://www.defensemedianetwork.
com/stories/danger-close-oda-3336-in-the-shok-valley/. Published May 20, 2010. Accessed March 7, 2018.
 
3. Ropelis L. Air commando saves lives in Afghanistan. Air Force Special Operations Command website. Published 
December 23, 2008. Accessed March 7, 2018.
 
4. Grau LW, Vazquez H. Ground combat at high altitude. Milit Rev. 2002;Jan–Feb. http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/
documents/groundcombat/groundcombat.htm. Accessed March 7, 2018.
 
5. Hackett PH, Roach RC. High-altitude medicine and physiology. In: Auerbach PS, ed. Wilderness Medicine. 6th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012.
 
6. US Department of the Army. Altitude Acclimatization and Illness Management. Washington, DC: DA; 2010. Technical 
Bulletin, Medical, 505. 
 
7. Bert P. Barometric Pressure: Researches In Experimental Physiology. Hitchcock MA, Hitchcock FA, trans. Bethesda, MD: 
Undersea Medical Society, 1978. 
 
8. Crouch TD. The Bishop’s Boys: The Life of Wilbur and Orville Wright. New York, NY: WW Norton; 1989.
 
9. Naval Sea Systems Command. US Navy Diving Manual. Rev 7. Washington Navy Yard, DC: NAVSEA; 2016. 
 10. Eggen OJ. Edmond Halley. Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Edmond-Halley. Accessed December 22, 2017.
 11. Paul Bert. Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Paul-Bert. Accessed December 22, 2017.
 12. Paul Bert (1833-1886), aviation physiologist. JAMA. 1970;211(11):1849–1850.
 13. Marx RF. The History of Underwater Exploration. Mineola, NY: Courier Corporation; 1990.
 14. Foregger R. Development of mine rescue and underwater breathing apparatus: appliances of Henry Fleuss. J Hist Med 
Allied Sci. 1974;29(3):317.
 15. Kryskow MA, Beidleman BA, Fulco CS, et al. Performance during simple and complex psychomotor tasks at various 
altitudes. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2013;84:1147–1152. 
 16. Tharion WJ, Hoyt RW, Marlowe BE, Cymerman A. Effects of high altitude and exercise on marksmanship. Aviat Space 
Environ Med. 1992;63(2):114–117. 
 17. Moore CM, Swain DP, Ringleb SI, Morrison S. Effects of acute hypoxia and exercise on marksmanship. Med Sci Sports 
Exer. 2014;46(4):795–801.
 18. Norris JN, Viire E, Aralis H, et al. High altitude headache and acute mountain sickness at moderate elevations in a 
military population during battalion-level training exercises. Mil Med. 2012;177(8):917–923.
 19. Landdau DA, Chapnick L, Yoffe N, et al. Cervical and lumbar MRI findings in aviators as a function of aircraft type. 
Aviat Space Environ Med. 2006;77(11):1158–1161.
 20. Gaydos SJ. Low back pain: considerations for rotary wing aircrew. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2012;83(9):879–889. 
 21. Byeon JH, Kim JW, Jeong HJ, et al. Degenerative changes of spine in helicopter pilots. Ann Rehabil Med. 2013;37(5):706–
712.
345
Environmental Extremes: Alternobaric
 22. Grossman A, Nakdimon I, Chapnick L, Levy Y. Back symptoms in aviators flying different aircraft. Aviat Space Environ 
Med. 2012;83(7):702–725.
 23. Bove AA. Diving medicine. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014;189(12):1479–1486.
 24. Neuman T. Arterial gas embolism and pulmonary barotrauma. In: Bennett and Elliott’s Physiology and Medicine of Diving. 5th ed. London, England: Saunders; 2003: 557–577.
 25. Pendergast DR, Moon RE, Krasney JJ, Held HE, Zamparo P. Human physiology in an aquatic environment. Compr 
Physiol. 2015;5:1705–1750.
 26. Scheuring RA. A proposed fluid maintenance schedule for rotary wing aviation crews in hot weather environments. 
Aviat Space Environ Med. 2012;83(3):453.
 27. US Navy. Manual of the Medical Department. Washington, DC: HQDN; 2005: 12. NAVMEDP-117.
 28. Bove AA. The cardiovascular system and diving risk. Undersea Hyperb Med. 2011;38(4):261–269.
 29. Bove AA. Medical aspects of sports diving. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1996;28(5):591–595.
 30. Coop CA, Adams KE, Webb CN. SCUBA diving and asthma: clinical recommendations and safety. Clin Rev Allergy 
Immunol. 2016;50(1):18–22.
 31. Ziser A, Väänänen A, Melamed Y. Diving and chronic spontaneous pneumothorax. Chest. 1985,87(2); 264–265.
 32. North JJ. Thoracoscopic management of spontaneous pneumothorax allows prompt return to aviation duties. Aviat 
Space Environ Med. 1994,65(12):1128–1129.
346
Fundamentals of Military Medicine
