61
*Correspondence to Steven Schauer, 3698 Chambers Pass, JBSA Fort Sam Houston, TX 78234 or steven.g.schauer.mil@mail.mil
1MAJ Schauer is with the US Army Institute of Surgical Research, JBSA Fort Sam Houston, TX; Brooke Army Medical Center, JBSA Fort Sam 
Houston, TX; Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD; and 59th Medical Wing, JBSA Lackland, TX. 2LTC Naylor is 
with Madigan Army Medical Center, Joint Base Lewis McChord, WA. 3Ms Uhaa is with US Army Institute of Surgical Research, JBSA Fort Sam 
Houston, TX. 4MAJ April is with Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD; and 4th Infantry Division, 2nd Infantry 
Brigade Combat Team, Fort Carson, CO. 5Dr De Lorenzo is with University of Texas Health–San Antonio, San Antonio, TX.
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) recommends life-saving interventions; however, these interventions 
can only be implemented if military prehospital providers 
carry the necessary equipment to the injured casualty. Combat 
medics primarily use aid bags to transport medical materiels 
forward on the battlefield. We seek to assess combat medic 
materiel preparedness to employ TCCC-recommended interventions by inventorying active duty, combat medic aid bags. 
Methods: We sought combat medics organic to combat arms 
units stationed at Joint Base Lewis McChord. Medics volunteered to complete a demographic worksheet and have the 
contents of their aid bag photographed and inventoried. We 
spoke with medic unit leadership prior to their participation 
and asked that the medics bring their aid bags in the way they 
would pack for a combat mission. We categorized medic aid 
bag contents in the following manner: (1) hemorrhage control; (2) airway management; (3) pneumothorax treatment, 
or (4) volume resuscitation. We compared the items found in 
the aid bags against the contemporary TCCC guidelines. Results: In January 2019, we prospectively inventoried 44 combat medic aid bags. Most of the medics were male (86%), in 
the grade of E4 (64%), and had no deployment experience 
(64%). More medics carried a commercial aid bag (55%) than 
used the standard issue M9 medical bag (45%). Overall, the 
most frequently carried medical device was an NPA (93%). 
Overall, 91% of medics carried at least one limb tourniquet, 
2% carried a junctional tourniquet, 31% carried a supraglottic airway (SGA), 64% carried a cricothyrotomy setup/kit, 
75% carried a chest seal, and 75% carried intravenous (IV) 
fluid. The most commonly stocked limb tourniquet was the 
C-A-T (88%), the airway kit was the H&H cricothyrotomy 
kit (38%), the chest injury set were prepackaged needle decompression kits (81%), and normal saline was the most frequently carried fluid (47%). Most medics carried a heating 
blanket (54%). Conclusions: Most medics carried materiels 
that address the common causes of preventable death on the 
battlefield. However, most materiels stowed in aid bags were 
not TCCC-preferred items. Moreover, there was a small subset 
of medics who were not prepared to handle the major causes 
of death on the battlefield based on the current state of their 
aid bag.
Keywords: combat; medic; aid bag; military
Introduction
Background
The TCCC guidelines are a set of evidence-based, prehospital 
trauma management recommendations specifically designed 
for the austere, combat setting. 1,2 Military armed conflict introduces numerous factors not encountered in civilian trauma 
medicine that must inform and influence medical management 
expectations placed on military prehospital providers, namely 
combat medics. In particular, “equipment must be simple, light, 
and rugged.”3 A life-saving intervention may be rendered useless if it cannot be carried to battlefield casualties and effectively 
administered by combat medics, potentially under hostile fire.
Front-line, combat medics have few options to transport medical materiel to the point of injury. The primary method utilized by combat medics are aid bags, or backpacks worn over 
the uniform and body armor where size and weight are of the 
utmost importance. 4 Excessive size and weight increase physical exertion and limits mobility, especially in hostile situations 
where rapid mobility is of the highest importance. The US 
Army currently fields the M9 medical bag and several commercial vendors offer variations of aid bags and self-contained 
litter kits—in addition to smaller pouches that are worn on 
the thigh or attached to body armor—that combat medics may 
use. 5 In addition to the size and weight limitations, medics can 
carry only what is logistically available. Multiple, previously 
published military studies attribute medical materiel shortfalls 
to the deployed, medical logistical system. 6–11
Despite more than two decades of TCCC and numerous published studies related to TCCC, there are no published data that 
describe and evaluate the combat medic aid bag and its capacity to facilitate TCCC-recommended, life-saving interventions.
Goal of This Investigation
We seek to assess combat medic materiel preparedness to use 
TCCC-recommended interventions by inventorying active duty 
combat medic aid bags.
Methods
We sought soldiers with the military occupational specialty 
(MOS) 68W, with or without special skills identifiers, assigned to a brigade combat team. We asked medics with personal aid bags (i.e., not unit issued) to bring their aid bags for 
An Inventory of the Combat Medics’ Aid Bag
Steven G. Schauer, DO, MS1; Jason F. Naylor, PA-C2; Nguvan Uhaa, LPN3; 
Michael D. April, MD, DPhil, MSc4; Robert A. De Lorenzo, MD, MSM, MSCI5
All articles published in the Journal of Special Operations Medicine are protected by United States copyright law 
and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, or otherwise published without the prior written permission 
of Breakaway Media, LLC. Contact publisher@breakawaymedia.org.
62  |  JSOM Volume 20, Edition 1 / Spring 2020
equipment inventorying. Before participating, we contacted 
relevant unit leadership and asked that the medics bring their 
aid bags in the way they would pack for a combat mission 
(without medications).
Ethics
We submitted project proposal H-18-035 to the US Army Institute of Surgical Research (USAISR) regulatory support division. Our project met all USAISR regulatory requirements 
for performance improvement not requiring institutional review board oversight. Participants volunteered to complete 
the aid bag inventory and associated survey. Additionally, we 
obtained approval to inventory and photograph aid bags from 
the relevant chain of command.
Surveys
We prospectively administered surveys to combat medics. Surveys solicited data on each subject’s demographics and prior 
operational experience. The surveys also solicited data regarding the contents of each subjects’ aid bag (see the Survey online 
at https://jsom.us/SchauerSurvey).
TCCC Guidelines and Lifesaving Interventions
We categorized medic aid bag contents according to the category of life-saving intervention facilitated by each piece of 
equipment: (1) hemorrhage control; (2) airway management; 
(3) pneumothorax treatment, or (4) volume resuscitation. We 
used TCCC Guidelines for Medical Personnel (version 31 January 2017) to define the equipment that medics should carry 
in their aid bags and compared carried equipment against that 
stipulated in the guidelines. Depending on the item and its intended use, we also captured subcategories (generally by manufacturer or brand). We consolidated commodity items (e.g., 
interchangeable and not requiring any training to use a different make or brand) under a single category.
Data Analysis
We performed all statistical analysis using Microsoft Excel (version 10, Redmond, WA) and JMP Statistical Discovery from 
SAS (version 13, Cary, NC). We used descriptive statistics.
Results
In January 2019, we prospectively inventoried 44 combat 
medic aid bags from units assigned to the 7th Infantry Division. A majority of the medics were male (86%), in the military 
grade of E4 (64%), and had no deployment experience (64%). 
Slightly more medics carried a commercial aid bag (55%) than 
used the standard issue M9 medical bag (45%). The most 
prevalent medical device was a nasopharyngeal airway (93%). 
For massive hemorrhage control, the most commonly found 
item was the C-A-T tourniquet (88%). The H&H cricothyrotomy kit (38%) was the most frequently packed advanced 
airway device. In the pneumothorax treatment category, the 
most prevalent item was a prepackaged needle decompression 
kit (81%). In the circulation category, normal saline was the 
most frequently carried fluid (47%). In addition, 75% carried 
a SAM splint and a heating blanket (54%) (Table 1).
Discussion
We inventoried active duty combat medic aid bags to evaluate 
materiel preparedness to deliver TCCC-recommended, life- 
saving interventions. Overall, we found most medics carried 
materiel to address the most common preventable causes of 
death on the battlefield (Table 2). However, few of the specific 
devices carried were preferred by TCCC. More medics used 
a commercial, nonstandard aid bag than used the unit- issued 
M9 medical bag. More concerning is that 9% of medics did 
not have any limb tourniquets, 98% did not have a junctional 
tourniquet, 69% did not have an SGA, 36% did not have a 
cricothyrotomy setup, 25% did not have a chest seal, and 25% 
did not have any IV fluids. Ostensibly, these medics are not 
prepared to handle potentially preventable causes of battlefield 
deaths. Of note, the majority of the medics reported no deployment experience, suggesting that most lacked much, if any, 
real-world experience.
Hemorrhage is the most common cause of preventable death 
on the battlefield. 12,13 TCCC recommends the following items 
for hemorrhage control: limb tourniquet, junctional tourniquet 
(JTQ), and hemostatic dressings (Combat Gauze preferred; 
Celox Gauze, ChitoGauze, or XStat acceptable). 2 Almost all 
medics (94%) carried a CoTCCC-approved limb tourniquet. 
However, only one medic (2%) possessed a JTQ and no medics 
packed hemostatic dressings. During the recent conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, it was standard unit practice for all service 
members to carry C-A-T tourniquets in the pockets of their 
uniforms. 5 US Army standard issue now also includes the improved first aid kit (IFAK) that contains C-A-T tourniquets and 
a hemostatic dressing. US Army combat lifesavers (CLS) receive 
CLS bags that also contain C-A-T tourniquets and hemostatic 
dressings. 14 However, none of these medical kits contain a JTQ. 
Junctional hemorrhage surpassed extremity hemorrhage as the 
most common cause of preventable death on the battlefield after widespread distribution of limb tourniquets. Given multiple, readily available alternative sources for limb tourniquets, 
we recommend unit medical leadership consider having medics 
pack JTQ, not limb tourniquets, in their aid bags to maximize 
hemorrhage control measures in the forward battlespace.
Airway compromise was the second most common cause of 
preventable death on the battlefield. 12,13 TCCC recommends 
the following items for airway management: NPA, supraglottic airway (SGA; i-Gel preferred), and cricothyroidotomy kit 
(Cric-Key preferred). Of all items, NPA was the most commonly stowed medical materiel (93%). Curiously, published 
data on military prehospital airway management during the 
recent conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq demonstrate rare utilization of the NPA. 6,15 Most medics (65%) possessed a cricothyroidotomy kit in their aid bag; however, only 1 (3. 4%) was 
the TCCC-preferred Cric-Key. Only 31% of medics carried an 
TABLE 1 Demographics of Medics With Aid Bags Inventoried*
% (n) or Median (IQR)
Demographics
Age, y
23 (31–29)
Sex, male
86% (32)
Rank
E2
5% (2)
E3
5% (2)
E4
64% (24)
E5
21% (8)
E6
3% (1)
Deployment 
experience
None
75% (28)
1
18% (7)
2
5% (2)
*We were unable to link seven aid bags to surveys for demographic 
information.
All articles published in the Journal of Special Operations Medicine are protected by United States copyright law 
and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, or otherwise published without the prior written permission 
of Breakaway Media, LLC. Contact publisher@breakawaymedia.org.
An Inventory of the Combat Medics’ Aid Bag  |  63
SGA and none were the TCCC-preferred i-Gel SGA. Only 15% 
of medics carried any suction device, and all were manually 
operated disposable units. Our findings demonstrate medics 
rarely carried TCCC-preferred airway management devices. 
This finding may be due to a mismatch in TCCC recommendations and the US Army medical logistics system. We recommend the CoTCCC incorporate US Army Medical Materiel 
Agency representatives in its periodic guideline review and updates to synchronize the medical and logistical communities.
TCCC guidelines recommend blood products for resuscitation 
of hypotensive combat casualties. 2 In the absence of blood 
products, TCCC recommends the following intravenous fluids 
by precedence: Hextend then LR/Plasma-Lyte A. TCCC recommends against NS. Most of the medics carried NS (47%), 
while less stowed TCCC-recommended fluids: 2% Hextend 
and 36% LR. While logistical constraints may explain fewer 
medics carrying TCCC-recommended fluids, it does not account for medics packing a product (NS) that TCCC recommends against. This finding suggests medics and unit medical 
leadership may not be well versed in TCCC guidelines as the 
cost differences are not substantial enough to limit use of LR. 
We recommend periodic TCCC training for medics and medical unit leadership to improve TCCC guideline adherence.
Study Limitations
Our study has several important limitations. First, we specifically instructed medics and unit leadership to pack aid bags 
as they would for combat operations. Despite this request, it 
is possible that some participants did not adhere and this may 
account for some of our findings. Second, medics pack only 
the medical materiel available in the logistics system. Consequently, deficiencies in unit medical stores may account for 
some of our findings. Correspondingly, unit medical leaders 
may be accountable for non-perishable medical equipment 
(e.g., pulse oximeters) and, as a result, may not issue those 
items to medics for stowage in individual aid bags. Conversely, 
some medical materiel may be expendable and in ample supply and thus be carried by more medics in our study. Third, 
medical units are centrally issued medical materiel as part 
of sets, kits, and outfits. Although units may order medical 
supplies, they can only order what is available in the system. 
Newer items that are commercially available (e.g., i-Gel SGA, 
Cric-Key cricothyroidotomy kit, etc.) may not be part of issued equipment and/or available via logistical resupply. Consequently, some of our findings may reflect a logistical supply 
system still updating its inventory. A consideration for a future 
study would be assessing for equipment requested that was 
not received as that may better highlight shortages related to 
logistical challenges. Last, while the Army frequently employs 
a “train as you fight” mantra, the logistical supply chain and 
unit budgets are vastly different in the garrison setting compared to the predeployment/deployment phases and thus this 
may influence materiel product availability and oversight.
Conclusions
Most medics carried materiel that address the common causes 
of preventable death on the battlefield. However, most materiel stowed in aid bags were not TCCC-preferred items. 
Moreover, there was a small subset of medics that were not 
prepared to handle the major causes of death on the battlefield 
with the current state of their aid bag.
TABLE 2 Itemized Aid Bag Inventory
Category
Item
% (n)
Aid bag
Standard issue M9
45% (20)
Nonissue bag
55% (24)
Hemorrhage
Any tourniquet
91% (40)
 SOFTW
6% (3)
 C-A-T
88% (39)
 Other
0% (0)
Any junctional tourniquet
2% (1)
 JETT
0% (0)
 SAM
2% (1)
 Other
0% (0)
XSTAT
0% (0)
Airway
NPA
93% (41)
OPA
29% (13)
BVM
31% (14)
Suction device
15% (7)
Any SGA device
31% (14)
 KingLT (any size)
31% (14)
 Combitube
0% (0)
 LMA
0% (0)
Any cricothyrotomy equipment
64% (28)
 Control-Cric
2% (1)
 H&H cricothyrotomy kit
38% (17)
 NAR cricothyrotomy kit
25% (11)
 Other cricothyrotomy kit
0% (0)
Endotracheal tube
2% (1)
Macintosh blade
2% (1)
Miller blade
2% (1)
ETT holder
0% (0)
Pneumothorax
Stethoscope
47% (21)
Any chest seal
75% (33)
 Chest seal – H&H
41% (18)
 Chest seal – NAR
27% (12)
 Chest seal – other
27% (12)
Chest tube
2% (1)
Chest tube kit (prepackaged)
2% (1)
Prepackaged needle decompression 
kit
81% (36)
Circulation
Any IV fluid
75% (33)
 Hextend
2% (1)
 Lactated Ringers
36% (16)
 Saline
47% (21)
 Other
2% (1)
Pressure bag
0% (0)
Warmer – EnFlow
0% (0)
Warmer – Thermal Angel
0% (0)
Warmer – other
0% (0)
Monitoring
Pulse oximetry
47% (21)
Colorimetric end-tidal CO2
2% (1)
Blood pressure cuff
0% (0)
Miscellaneous
SAM splint
75% (33)
Pelvic binder
2% (1)
Cervical collar
9% (4)
Heating blanket
54% (23)
Atomizer
0% (0)
Eye shield
57% (25)
All articles published in the Journal of Special Operations Medicine are protected by United States copyright law 
and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, or otherwise published without the prior written permission 
of Breakaway Media, LLC. Contact publisher@breakawaymedia.org.
64  |  JSOM Volume 20, Edition 1 / Spring 2020
Disclaimer
Opinions or assertions contained herein are the private views 
of the authors and are not to be construed as official or as 
reflecting the views of the Department of the Air Force, the 
Department of the Army, or the Department of Defense.
Funding
Our study was supported by a Defense Health Program grant 
(DP_67. 2_17_I_17_J9_1635).
Disclosure
The authors have none to report.
Author Contributions
SGS is the principal investigator and was involved in all aspects 
of the study. JFN was involved in protocol development, data 
collection, data interpretation and manuscript development. 
NU was involved in data collection and manuscript development. MDA and RAD were involved in grant submission, 
protocol development, data interpretation and manuscript development. All authors contributed significantly to this project.
References
1. Butler FK Jr, Hagmann J, Butler EG. Tactical Combat Casualty
Care in Special Operations. Mil Med. 1996;161(suppl 1):3–16.
2. Butler F. TCCC Updates: Two Decades of Saving Lives on the
Battlefield: Tactical Combat Casualty Care Turns 20. J Spec Oper
Med. 2017;17(2):166–172.
3. Butler FK Jr, et al. Tactical combat casualty care 2007: evolving
concepts and battlefield experience. Mil Med. 2007;172(suppl 1):
1–19.
4. The Soldier’s Heavy Load. https://www.cnas.org/publications
/reports/the-soldiers-heavy-load-1, Accessed: 06 October 2019.
5. Kotwal RS, et al. Saving lives on the battlefield: a joint trauma
system review of pre-hospital trauma care in combined joint operating area-Afghanistan (CJOA-A). 2013, Central Command
MacDill AFB FL.
6. Schauer SG, et al. Prehospital airway management in Iraq and
Afghanistan: a descriptive analysis. South Med J. 2018;111(12):
707–713.
7. Schauer SG, et al. Trends in prehospital analgesia administration by us forces from 2007 through 2016. Prehosp Emerg Care.
2019;23(2):271–276.
8. Schauer S, et al. Chest Seal Placement for Penetrating Chest
Wounds by Prehospital Ground Forces in Afghanistan. J Spec
Oper Med. 2017;17(3):85–89.
9. Schauer SG, et al. An analysis of casualties presenting to military
emergency departments in Iraq and Afghanistan. Am J Emerg
Med. 2019;37(1):94–99.
10. Naylor JF, et al. Non-battle emergency department utilization of
the first modular army field hospital prototype in support of Operation Inherent Resolve. Mil Med. 2018;184(5–6):e168–e171.
11. Schauer SG, et al. A descriptive analysis of casualties evacuated
from the Africa area of operations. Afr J Emerg Med. 2019;9:
S43–S46.
12. Eastridge BJ, et al. Died of wounds on the battlefield: causation
and implications for improving combat casualty care. J Trauma
Acute Care Surg. 2011;71(1):S4–S8.
13. Kelly JF, et al. Injury severity and causes of death from Operation
Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom: 2003–2004
versus 2006. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2008;64(2):S21–S27.
14. Flecha I, et al. Combat lifesaver-trained, first-responder application of junctional tourniquets: a prospective, randomized, crossover trial. Mil Med Res. 2018;5(1):31.
15. Lairet JR, et al. Prehospital interventions performed in a combat
zone: a prospective multicenter study of 1,003 combat wounded.
J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(2):S38–S42.
All articles published in the Journal of Special Operations Medicine are protected by United States copyright law 
and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, or otherwise published without the prior written permission 
of Breakaway Media, LLC. Contact publisher@breakawaymedia.org.
